Do you know Steven who is the most
dangerous individual that a woman will
ever meet in her life? Her husband. And
the overwhelming number one reason is
because of
Dr. Gadsad is an evolutionary
psychologist
renowned for his thoughtprovoking and
challenging insights into the
underlining principles
that shape decision-m relationships and
societal trends.
If you think that there is some
knowledge that should not be pursued
because it doesn't support your
ideology, that's a grotesqually
dangerous principle. So, for example,
the idea that monogamy is natural is not
true. Men are much more likely to want
more sexual partners. That's what's been
found in many studies across many
cultures. But the fact that I explained
why it might make evolutionary sense to
cheat doesn't mean I'm justifying it.
But now, here's the interesting part.
Women too have evolved a very strong
desire for sexual variety. You know,
when a woman is most likely to cheat,
it's when they
In your book, you talk about a mate
desiraability score.
Yes. So usually we end up assorting on
our mating value, which is taking all of
our attributes and then saying, "What do
you score?" So for example, the number
one attribute that women seek is
anything that's related to social
status. Now, it wouldn't be good for an
87 to go with a 36. That's going to put
a huge stressor on our relationship. But
here's the good news. There are
effective strategies that could improve
my score. And let's break them down very
simply. First,
Dr. God, what are the ideas that you've
shared that have got you in the most
trouble?
I'm going to get hate mail for this.
Buckle up.
This is a sentence I never thought I'd
say in my life. Um, we've just hit 7
million subscribers on YouTube, and I
want to say a huge thank you to all of
you that show up here every Monday and
Thursday to watch our conversations. Um,
from the bottom of my heart, but also on
behalf of my team who you don't always
get to meet. There's almost 50 people
now behind the D of a CEO that worked to
put this together. So, from all of us,
thank you so much. Um, we did a raffle
last month and we gave away prizes for
people that subscribed to the show up
until 7 million subscribers. And you
guys love that raffle so much that we're
going to continue it. So, every single
month we're giving away money can't buy
prizes, including meetings with me,
invites to our events, and a,000 gift
vouchers to anyone that subscribes to
the D of SEO. There's now more than 7
million of you. So, if you make the
decision to subscribe today, you can be
one of those lucky people. Thank you
from the bottom of my heart. Let's get
to the conversation.
Dr. Gad Sad, what have you devoted your
life to? Uh the pursuit of truth and the
defense of freedoms.
And what does what does that mean?
So truth is uh what we hopefully can
achieve uh through the scientific
method. Of course, truth is provisional
in that whatever we might have thought
was true 300 years ago, we have the
epistemological humility to say, "Oh, we
were wrong. There's a new truth." But I
do wake up every morning thinking that
there are wonderful things to discover
about human nature given that I'm an
evolutionary behavioral scientist. And
so truth in that sense,
uh, liberty and freedom in that there
should be nothing that is off limits for
people to do research on, to speak out
on. So for example, you now hear a
growing intrusion of the concept of
forbidden knowledge. The idea that
there's some research that because it
might offend someone, it might
marginalize a group, it shouldn't be
pursued. I don't I don't believe in
that. So there is no research that is
off limits. As long as the research that
you're doing is pursued in an unbiased
manner pursuant to the scientific
method. So example, one of the ways that
you can end your career very quickly as
a social scientist, if you do any
research looking at group differences,
certainly racial differences, don't you
dare do any research on that. Even sex
differences is not a good idea. So if
you do research on sex differences and
it demonstrates that women are superior
to men on some task, go ahead, you're a
hero. Publish it. But if you do research
that shows that men are superior to
women on a task, you better file that in
the drawer and keep your mouth shut
forever more because we don't want to be
promulgating sexist patriarchal
stereotypes. And so as someone who is an
evolutionary psychologist who
understands that humans are made up of
two phenotypes called male and female,
uh it is expected that there are many
things on which men and women are the
same. some things that men do better
than women, some things that women do
better than men. It's called evolution.
It's called biology. Well, one of the
things where I first began seeing how
idiotic otherwise very intelligent
people can be called professors is in
the negation of what I said right now,
which is just admitting that there are
innate and evolved sex differences is a
dreadful thing to say in the social
sciences. And so that's how I first had
a kind of Eureka moment. Houston, we
have a problem. How could it be that
these educated, sophisticated professors
could negate something that on average a
3-day old newborn pigeon should be able
to recognize? And so that's what that's
what sent me on my journey to eventually
write the parasitic mind 30 plus years
ago.
So what is an evolutionary behavior
scientist?
Right. Great question. So
you can study behavior in many ways. So
for example, behaviorism which was
something that was developed in the
1930s argued that everything that we do
is as a result of stimulus and response.
So for example, Pavlovian conditioning
is a form of behaviorism. Right? You
associate a unconditioned response,
something that you already innately
have. The dog salivates when he sees
food. And now you condition him to if
they hear the bell to associate that
with the food. And now when I just ring
the bell, he will salivate. And so the
behaviorists of you know 70, 80, 100
years ago argued that all learning was
due to behaviorism. So there are many
different schools of thought when it
comes to what is the best framework for
studying human behavior. An evolutionary
behavioral scientist argues that you
can't study human behavior if you don't
root the framework of how you're going
to tackle this in an understanding of
how evolution would have shaped the
human mind. Now, this should sound as
blatantly obvious, but again, for social
scientists, that's Nazi talk because
social scientists believe that evolution
applies to every single species on Earth
except one called human beings.
Or if they believe that evolution
applies to humans, it applies to explain
why we have opposable thumbs. It applies
to explain why we've evolved the
respiratory system that we have. But
don't you dare explain something above
the neck called the human mind using
evolution. I'm speaking now as those
folks. They argue that we are cultural
animals. We transcend our biology. So
all that an evolutionary behavioral
scientist does is whatever he or she is
studying, they try to look for the
ultimate Darwinian signatures. I'm going
to give you two examples. This is from
uh a book called Homicide by uh Martin
Daly and Marggo Margot Wilson. a husband
and wife team who are two of the
pioneers of evolutionary psychology. I
first read that book as a first semester
doctoral student at Cornell where it it
was an advanced social psychology
course. About halfway through the
semester, the professor, his name was
Professor Dennis Regan, assigned this
book to us. What they did in the book is
apply an evolutionary framework to study
patterns of criminality. And in a second
now, I'll I'll unpack what that means.
So there are certain patterns of crime
that happen in exactly the same way for
the exact same reasons irrespective of
which culture it happens in and
irrespective of time period. So it
certainly can't be due to cultural
factors. It can't be to era factors
because it transcends all those things.
So let me give you two examples from the
book and that was actually my Eureka
moment where I decided ah I will now
take this evolutionary framework and
apply it to consumer psychology to
psychology of decision-m which
eventually is the field that I founded.
So, two examples. Example one, and
forgive me if I put you on the spot.
It's it's it's worthwhile to
what do you think is the number one
predictor of there being child abuse in
a home?
An absent
parent.
Okay. Very, very reasonable answer. And
so, usually in lecture one, when I'm
teaching an evolution psychology course,
I'll ask this question. I'll start
putting all the students answers. And
they're all reasonable answers. If there
is alcoholism in the home, if one of the
parents had been abused in their past so
that they they they mimic that behavior
onto their children. Then all
reasonable. Well, what if I and by the
way, no one guesses what the real answer
is. So then I say, well, guess what
guys, you just listed 25 reasonable
predictors. The number one predictor is
hundfold more predictive than anything
that's on that board. I've lectured this
a million times. I'm getting goosebumps
telling it to you right now. So, let me
explain what a 100fold means. In
science, when let's say you have I want
to check the efficacy of a drug, and I
want to compare it to a placebo, a sugar
pill. Well, if it has a 1.2 odds ratio,
meaning it's 20% more effective. So,
it's 1 to 1.2, that would be a big
effect. 1 to 1.2. What I'm saying is 1
to 100. So it is astronomically greater
effect than anything we would typically
publish in science. Well the number one
reasons Stephen I've kept you in
suspense long enough is if there is a
steparent in the family. So there's a
100fold increase in child abuse if the
home is not made up of two biological
parents. This is why the fable of
Cinderella is such a universal fable
because it speaks to an evolutionary
principle. the nasty uh uh stepmother is
only differentially nasty to her
stepdaughter. She's actually very very
nice to her two biological daughters. So
now you would say, well, what would be
the evolutionary explanation for that?
Well, we know in many many species where
you have very high parental investment,
say for example in lion prides, lions
are the only feline group where they're
a social group. Most other uh felines
are solitary that the only thing that
the male does is the copulatory act and
then there's not then he's off. Well, in
lion pride, the males do invest heavily
in their children. What ends up
happening is there's two or three
dominant males within a pride and they
kick out all the young males that are
now coming up so that there's all these
frustrated young males in the savannah
that are now looking to take over a
pride. They will challenge the two three
dominant males and for a very long time
those older males will rebuff the
attacks. But father time eventually
catch up to you and you're left with two
choices as the dominant male. You either
leave and you end up, you know, having a
slow death out alone in the wilderness
or they will kill you. Now when the new
incoming lions come in, do you know
what's the first thing they do? First on
the agenda list, first thing they do is
what?
They attack the kids.
Exactly. They kill off in a complete
systematic infanticide, genocide every
single cub who by definition could not
have been sired by them. Why? Because
I'm going to spend a lot of energy and
resources investing because we are a by
parental species as a lion pride. I
don't want I don't want to be investing
in another male's cubs. Therefore, I now
paradoxically, incredibly,
after the females put up a big fight to
try to stop those new incoming males,
they end up losing the fight. First
thing that happens after is the females
go into estrus, meaning they become
sexually receptive to the new males. So,
I joke with my students in the human
context, you put on Barry White music to
get the ladies interested. You buy a
beautiful gift, you pay attention. You
want to get the lady's attention in p in
lion price society, kill her children.
So that's one example of how we've
evolved the calculus in our brains to
not feel as happy investing in other ch
not in other children than our own. Now
the next thing that ends up happening is
some student will say, "Oh, but does
that mean you are justifying through
science
child abuse?" And of course the answer
is no. Right? An oncologist studies
cancer. That doesn't mean he or she is
for cancer. That doesn't mean they are
pro- cancer. It means that if you want
to understand cancer, you have to study
it honestly. So if you want to tackle
child abuse and you now know that that
step parenthood is the biggest
predictor. That's that's a valuable
tidbit to have. So that's example one.
Example two.
Do you know Stephen who is by far the
most dangerous individual that a woman
will ever meet in her life? Whether it's
the Yanomo tribe in the Amazon, whether
it's the Hata tribe in Central Africa,
whether it's in ancient Greece 2,000
years ago, or whether it's in Detroit,
Michigan 2,000 years from now, who is
the most dangerous person by far that
you will ever meet?
Um,
let me think about this. who's the most
dangerous person she will ever meet
by orders of magnitude more than anybody
else. And the minute that I'll say it,
you'll go, "Oh, no kidding." But the
fact that you don't exactly demonstrates
my point. And that's why evolution is so
important.
I think the most dangerous person she
will ever meet is
a another
You're already off.
Okay. I don't know.
Her husband.
I was going to say
there you go.
I was very close cuz my brain went her
my brain went her future husband,
right?
Because I was thinking in the in the
courtship process, that's quite
dangerous.
So whether it be her long-term partner
or prospective long-term partner, right?
So to your point,
a husband is the most dangerous. And
then the overwhelming number one reason
that might drive him to domestic
violence all the way to homicide
is suspected or realized infidelity.
Okay.
I'm a true crime addict and se the stat
is always in these true crime shows that
about I think it's 70% of the time when
a woman is goes missing was murdered
it's the husband.
Exactly.
Something crazy like that.
Exactly. Now, sometimes in those shows,
it's because I want to get rid of my
current wife so I can run off with
another one. Yeah. But notwithstanding
that potential effect, usually when I go
into homicidal rage, it's because I I'm
concerned that either you have cheated
on me or you actually I I have proof
that you have cheated on me. So then the
question becomes, why have human males
evolved the cognitive, emotional, and
behavioral repertoire to respond in this
way? Again, you're not justifying it.
You're not saying, "Oh, if I give you
the scientific explanation, that means
it's okay to beat women." But the reason
is because we are a by parental species.
Human dads are extraordinary dads in the
mamleian context. We're by far one of
the most vested dads. Well, now we don't
invest as much as human females, but we
are really super dads. So therefore your
ancestors and mine Stephen male
ancestors don't come from a line where
they said hey don't worry ladies have
have at it with the sexy gardener as
much as you'd like because I'd be happy
to then spend the next 18 years raising
go kids. And therefore we've evolved
that system to try to thwart a
fundamental danger to our genetic
interest which is paternity uncertainty.
There is no such thing as maternity
uncertainty. Right.
Mhm. So when I read that book
with such complicated phenomena that are
explained so elegantly, so
parsimmoniously, so simply so that you
go, yeah, that makes perfect sense. That
was my Eureka moment. And so
evolutionary behavioral science is
exactly what I just described the last 5
10 minutes, which is taking the
evolutionary biological and evolutionary
psychological lens to study human
phenomena. Before we get back to talking
more broadly, just came to mind that
with that context in mind then cheating
is justifiable.
Cheating in a romantic relationship.
So it depends what you when you say
justifiable, you're falling into the
trap of if you explain it
scientifically, it's okay. We also have
a moral compass that's due to an
evolutionary mechanism. So, one of the
difficulties of life is how to navigate
through the Darwinian strings that are
pulling me in different directions.
Right? I've evolved a desire to gorge on
fatty foods. But if I do that in an
unrestrained manner, I become a sumo
wrestler and I die of heart disease at
42. So, I've also evolved the mechanism
of self-control. So, the fact that I
explain why it might make evolutionary
sense to cheat doesn't mean I'm
justifying it.
Yeah. No. And I I think this is really
important because we have to give people
a toolkit to think about this
conversation
so that they don't assume that
everything that's being said is an
endorsement of the thing. It's just an
explanation of the thing through the
lens of evolution. And two very And you
know what? Some people can't do that.
Some people get so triggered by
Most people are called my colleagues.
Oh, really? Yeah.
That's right.
So, I just hope everyone listening now
knows that everything here isn't an
endorsement of a thing. It's an
evolutionary explanation for a thing.
And you know, I'm sure we're both full
of biases, so nothing is ever that pure.
But but we'll try and just hope that
from here on out people understand that.
When I ask that question about cheating,
what I'm trying to understand is through
an evolutionary perspective, is monogamy
a normal thing?
I'm off and running for the next 10
minutes. You ready?
I'm I'm ready. Let me let me give a
little bit of context. So, I've got a
lot of male friends and I see in all
honesty the full spectrum of
relationships. I've got and this is kind
of how I'll describe it. I've got a
cohort of male friends that are
absolutely faithful, in great
relationships, um committed to their
partners, and have exercised what I I
assume is a form of discipline to not go
after any temptations that they might
have. Love that group of friends. Great.
Have this middle group of friends that
are struggling with all kinds of forces.
everything from pornography to um to to
to maybe dabbling. And then I have this
other group of friends who I would
categorize as the cheaters who cheat
almost uncontrollably
on their partners uncontrollably. And
this is the spectrum of friends here is
about 20 people. Now I look at that
group of friends and I go who is right?
Because morally I can say the ones over
here are hurting people. The cheaters
are hurting people you know especially
if they they're found in what they're
doing. But who is right from an
evolutionary perspective?
Well, they all are in a sense in that we
all have the desire to stray, but we
don't necessarily instantiate that
desire through overt behavior.
Men and women.
Men. Yeah. So, that's very good. So,
usually if I were to say, oh, men have
evolved a desire for sexual variety,
most people, even if they know nothing
about evolution, would say, yeah, that
that makes sense. But now, here's the
interesting part. Women too have evolved
a very strong desire for sexual variety.
Now, not to the same degree as men. So,
there have been studies that have been
conducted across a bewildering number of
cultures. And in every culture that's
been documented, men are much more
likely to want more sexual partners and
so on. But that doesn't mean that women
are Victorian chased prudes. So now let
me give you multiple lines of evidence
that suggests that women are hardly the
Victorian prudes that we might otherwise
wish they were in a Victorian novel.
You know when a woman is most likely to
cheat situationally.
I know cuz I've read your work. So
Okay. F. Okay. So So I'll say it or do
you want to say it?
Well, it's when they're maximally
fertile, isn't it?
Very good. You've done your homework. So
when they are maximally fertile is when
they're most likely to stray. Now, that
strategy, by the way, and and they're
less likely to insist on contraception.
You would think that if I'm cheating
outside my marriage, I'm I'm speaking as
a woman now. If I'm cheating outside my
marriage, I would want to increase the
likelihood of wearing I mean using
protection because I don't want to be
pregnant. But if the strategy for why
I'm cheating is because I'm shopping for
superior jeans, then it becomes
incumbent that I don't use protection.
Right? So you seldom have a woman who
will cheat with a guy who has who is of
lower phenotypic quality, genetic
quality. So I I would love to have Bill
Gates as home as my long-term partner,
but then I want the male Olympic swimmer
as the guy behind the bushes. Now, if I
can convince Bill Gates that the Olympic
male swimmer actually looks a lot like
Bill Gates and it's really your sweetie.
It's you, Billy. you're the one who then
I I won the as a woman I've won the
genetic uh lottery game. Okay. So, it's
not that women are not interested in
sexual variet. So, that's one. Here's
another one.
If you map out, this is from studies. I
think it was in the early8s. I don't
have the exact reference, but it's easy
to find.
Sorry. Just in your work, you say that
women are more likely to cheat with
someone who has good genetic stock.
Yeah.
Is Bill Gates not got good genetic stock
cuz he's rich and smart?
So, yes. So the intelligence element is
yes. Maybe the drive element is yes. But
the phenotype is a no. I mean what's the
phenotype?
Phenotype is your physical
manifestation. Right? So if I say I want
a guy who is tall, who has a V, uh who's
got testosterone jawline, right? I mean,
I don't usually, if I'm a woman, I don't
in my uh uh deep recesses of my mind
fantasized about being ravished by Bill
Gates.
Do I?
Are those physical features just
pointing at the fact that this person
can provide for me?
Absolutely. I mean, and you're saying,
"But Bill Gates already provides."
Yeah. But it's this also what's called
the sexy son hypothesis. Bill Gates will
not produce I mean he'll produce kids
who potentially to the extent that
intelligence is heritable will give me
intelligent kids but he won't give me uh
the kids that are Bronny right and of
course some of us are lucky to have both
Bronn and brains but that's a rare kind
compliment thank you
now imagine if I were 4 in taller then I
mean that's it I would be crowned
emperor no but in all seriousness both
men and women are very duplicitous in
their sexual behior behavior. So the
idea that monogamy is natural is not
true. Now it is natural in that about
85% of documented cultures have monogamy
as an institutional mechanism because
we're a biparental species and almost
all the other ones are have what's
called polygyny which is a term not to
be confused with polygamy. So I'm going
to do a little parenthesis and I'm going
to come back to the lines of evidence
that proves that women like sexual
variety as well. So polygamy just means
one to many. People use it as synonymous
with one man, multiple women. But that's
not what polygamy is. Polygamy is one to
many, which can take two forms. It could
be one man, multiple women, which is
called polygyny. Or it could be one
woman, multiple men, which is called
polyandry. There are almost no societies
where institutionally we have polyandry
because it wouldn't make evolutionary
sense for that mating system to arise.
The only famous case of polyandri is
called Tibetan
uh fraternal polyandri. So the word
fraternal means that to the extent that
there are ecological reasons why we have
to tolerate one woman going with
multiple guys, it'll be brothers. And
the reason for that is because of a
mechanism called inclusive fitness which
is that I can increase my reproductive
fitness through direct reproduction. I
have children and therefore they will
share half my genes but I can also
invest in the children of my siblings
who share also genes with me and I could
still be increasing my inclusive
fitness. So therefore, polyandry need
not be a Darwinian dead end because I'm
still extending my genes even in in such
a system.
So is this why I take care of my
brother's kids in part because that my
nieces and nephews are
100%. As a matter of fact, I've done
several scientific studies where I
exactly do these kinds of tests where I
look at
what is the pattern of investment in
different family members as a function
of their genetic relatedness to me. So R
is something called the coefficient of
genetic relatedness. So me and my
brother are R is.5. Me and my identical
twin our R is one. Me and a random
stranger are R0. Me and my nephews and
nieces 0.25. Me and my parents 0.5. Me
and my grandparents 0.25. Okay.
So we wanted to test whether the pattern
of investments in this case through gift
giving whether they correlate to the
genetic relatedness between the giver
and recipient. And as you might expect
intuitively, even if you're not a fancy
evolutionary psychologist, the greater
the genetic relatedness, the larger the
size of gift. I'm much more likely to
give a bigger gift at my brother's
wedding than I am to my second cousin.
Okay? And so we've evolved this calculus
that allows us to met out these
investments in line with our genetic
rel, by the way, you see across
countless animal species. the likelihood
of you coming out of your borro to
protect people who are in the borro
increases if whoever is in the borro has
greater genetic relatedness to you. So
the other part in the 2018 paper that's
going to blow your mind because that one
you wouldn't intuitively have expected
it. The the first finding you say yeah
it makes sense I give more gifts to my
brother than to my third cousin. So we
wanted to check whether at an actual
Israeli wedding because they had data
from actual 30 I think it was 30
weddings. So they had field data. They
had the data of all of the uh attendees
and the gifts that they gave. Uh Uncle
Morai gave $180. Rafika gave. Okay. So
what we wanted to test is whether the
mother's side or the father's side of
the bride and groom across all genetic
relatedness coefficients which side
would give more. Now in the Middle East
it's a patriarchal society but
evolutionary theory would predict
something differently and let me explain
why. So take for example your four
grandparents. Okay there's maternal
grandmother, maternal grandfather,
paternal grandmother, paternal
grandfather. In terms of the genetic
relatedness, they're each equally
genetically related to you. 0.25 quarter
of their genes they share with you. But
here's the second part. Genetic
assuredness is not the same across the
four. Your paternal grandfather has two
layers of paternity uncertainty.
Your maternal grandmother has zero
generational paternal paternity
uncertainty because there is no
maternity uncertainty. So therefore, you
would predict that the paternal
grandfather would invest the least in
his grandchildren, the maternal
grandmother would invest the most, and
the two other grandparents in the
middle. That's what's been found in many
studies across many cultures.
You might have to explain paternity
uncertainty.
Paternity uncertainty means that when a
child is born, you never know that he is
your child, right? Uh you the mother
always know that it's her child. She had
the child, right? So we wanted to test
whether the mother's side of both the
bride and groom would give greater gifts
than the father's side precisely because
there is no such thing as maternity
uncertainty but there is such a thing as
paternity uncertainty and that's exactly
what we found.
So the women's family gave more
presence.
Exactly.
Okay.
Yeah. Thank you for summarizing that
long rant.
But and why why again just to clarify
why that is because they're trying to
make sure that the male is invested. No,
there because the mother's side is
simply more vested in investing in the
in either the bride or groom because
they know that that is their infant.
Yeah. Because there's no uncertainty.
There's no uncertainty. You got it.
Okay. So, now can we close the loop on
the sexual variety? So, so far I said
that uh there's definitely evidence that
women also have a sexual variety pension
by virtue of them cheating more when
they are maximally fertile with they and
not insisting on uh contraception and
all that. Here's another one. You do a
mapping of across primates. So, here
come the bonobos, here come mountain
gorillas, here come chimpanzees, here
comes humans. So you put all the
primates and you do a uh calculation of
the size of the testes of the males in
that species as a function of female
sexual promiscuity in that species. Are
you with me?
Yes.
So mountain gorillas
phenomenal beasts 450 lbs some of the
most majestic males. They have a
territorial they they have a polygenous
arrangement. There is one male dominant
male that controls control to sexual
access to many females. So based on what
I just said, can you predict what the
size of their testes are?
They can have small testes.
Yes. Because there isn't sperm war
competition. Therefore, imagine how
unbelievable it is that a fundamental
male morphological attribute, the size
of your testes, is an adaptive response
to a female behavior in that species.
Greater female promiscuity in that
species, bigger testicles. So, mountain
gorillas, very small testicles. Okay?
Chimpanzees are just walking testicles.
Their bodies just exist to support
massive testes. Why? Because in chimp
society, we say hello sex. We say
goodbye sex. We fight sex, postfight
sex. So there is constant sex happening
so that the same female
is being impregnated by multiple males.
So the way that I fight against that is
by developing bigger testes because then
there are mechanisms where having bigger
testes solves that problem. So now here
comes Robin Baker actually a British
scientist who wrote a book called Sperm
Wars where he argued in his book some
have said it's contentious others said
that it's tight that the morphology of
human sperm
the makeup of it
the makeup of it is not simply the
standard one that we're all used to
seeing which is there is a head with a
tail and they're all rushing to that
mythical egg. Those are called
fertilizers. He demonstrated in his
research that there are two other types
of sperm phenotypes within a man's
ejaculate. There are the blockers that
don't look like the fertilizer and
defense.
Defense. Very good. And then there are
the killers.
Oh,
that go around hunting other men's
sperm. Now, let's put it all together.
sperm is viable within the reproductive
a woman's reproductive tract for about
72 hours. Therefore,
for men to have evolved, the chemical
weaponry to have blockers and killers
means that in our ancestral past, the
likelihood of women having been with
more than one man within a 72-hour
period, whether willfully or through
aggression, would have been high.
Therefore, that's why you evolve that
response. Now, here is where you can see
what happens with ideology and therefore
how why I wrote parasitic mind. When I
lecture this in front of radical
feminists, they'll come up, Dr. Sad,
you're such a brilliant scientist. Why?
Because the research that I just
described demonstrates that women could
be just as sexually ver voracious as men
and that they've evolved a desire also
for, you know, a sexual appetite that
corresponds with my women's studies and
radical feminism classes. Therefore,
when from this side of my mouth I say
something that supports their ideology,
I become a hero. If from this side of my
mouth I say, "Oh, but incidentally
across cultures, it's been studied
across many many cultures. Men do have
much greater desire for sexual variety."
Boo. So I can either go from hero to
zero depending on whether what I just
said supports your ideology or not.
That's not how you adjudicate science.
Science truth exists independently of
whether it supports your ideology or
not. Hence eventually the parasitic mind
because you're parasitized by bad
ideologies.
What are what are the ideas that you've
shared that have got you in the most
trouble?
So in my scientific work, humans are
biological beings shaped by the dual
forces of sexual and natural selection.
Buazi. Buazi. Okay. I mean people are
coming around now because the beauty of
science is that it's autocorrective
right I mean some of the biggest works
you you now know that they're the
biggest work by how much they were
originally rejected so many Nobel prizes
the story is always the same scientist
proposes an idea that is completely
unorthodox contrary to the prevailing
whims of accepted science and is
constantly reed rejected until it's not
very
simple example. Probably the thing that
has saved human beings the most from
death over the past 100 years. Well,
it's stuff related to hygiene issues
because a lot of times you'd have
childhood mortality because of exposure
to different pathogens. Well, the
gentleman who came up with the idea of
why so often women die during
childbirth. Do do you know what the
answer is?
Um because the doctor's not cleaned his
hands or
Yes. Beautiful. Well done, Steve. So, uh
it's Seml Weiss who was a doctor who
said, "What's happening here? Why are
these women getting this post uh natal
very devastating uh fever and then
within an a day or two they're gone? And
so he said, "Oh, wait a second." So the
the surgeons have just worked on
cadaavvers.
What's a cadaavver?
Uh like a dead dead body. Okay. So like
let's say they're they're doing forensic
pathology stuff. Okay. and then they
move straight to a gynecological
intervention with the woman. So when he
said and he did the studies that that
showed, hey, here are women who we we
asked the guys to clean or didn't ask
the guys to clean it and people laughed
him out of town. He died in a sanitarium
in a mental institution. He he was
completely like today we we erect
statues of him. Right. So, so to answer
your first point, when I first started
my career, when I said, "Oh, by the way,
you can't study consumers without
understanding their physiology, their
hormones." What kind of bush is this?
This is not a biology department. Get a
grip. You should have you should you
should not be in the business school.
So, what do you mean? You think that you
can you think that when a consumer eats,
they transcend their biology? It's
outside of their biology. Well, now a
lot of them are coming around. So that
when I first promulgated this idea 30
years ago, I was a Nazi. Today it's dear
Dr. Sad, it would be an honor if you
come and give the plenary lecture at our
university. Oh, but what happened 30
years ago when I was a bullshitter?
Well, apparently they caught on. So, so
in my academic work, the mere fact of
saying that we're biological beings was
the most triggering thing. In my public
engagement work, that's not directly
related to my science. Well, it's a very
long list, hence the parasitic mind. But
certainly when I talk about things
related, say, to Islam, that doesn't get
me a lot of Islamic friends,
unfortunately.
You're Jewish, aren't you?
I'm Jewish context.
Yes, I'm Jewish.
But but what I say would be true whether
I was Jewish or whether I was uh
anything else.
So, how as an evolutionary behavioral
scientist, how much of what we do is
driven by sex and relationships?
uh I mean so in in my earlier books so
I'm going to answer it again in a broad
in a big way uh in my first book which
is the evolutionary basis of consumption
and then in the consuming instinct I
argue that there are four key Darwinian
mechanisms that drive much of our
purpose of behavior so that's speaks to
your point uh there is
behaviors that are related to natural
selection or our survival instinct. So,
for example, the fact that I'm almost
certain that you and I have a preference
for some instantiation of a fatty food
more than raw celery is almost a
guarantee. Am I right?
Yes, I agree. Yeah.
Okay. And I'm I'm willing to bet that
everybody who's in the studio will will
also agree. Okay. Now, we may have a
different preference. So, I I pref I may
prefer fatty steak. you prefer uh
chocolate mousse, but we both prefer
chocolate mousse and steak over raw
celery. And so there are many
consumatory acts and preferences that I
can easily ultimately map to that drive.
The most obvious of which would be our
food preferences. Okay. To your direct
question, then the next module. So that
first module I call it the survival
module. The next module called the
reproductive module. sex to your
question are all the things that we do
because they're very much driven by sex
related issues. So the types of products
that men and women use as sexual signals
are astonishingly the same across
cultures. So for example,
owners of Ferrari are 99% male. Even
though there are a million women who
have the resources to certainly buy a
Ferrari, yet they don't. Oprah Winfrey
is not stopped from buying a Ferrari cuz
she can't afford it. And yet she's not
doing it. In the human context, fancy
cars take on the morphological feature
of the peacock's tail. So all animals
that are sexually reproducing use sexual
signals. Humans, given that they're also
a consumatory animal, will use specific
products to signal, look at me, I'm
better than than Stephen. The way that I
do that is by hopefully demonstrating
cues that I have higher status than you.
Okay?
Now, women will also engage in vigorous
sexual signaling, but it'll be related
to things that are beautifification,
right? So cosmetic surgeries around the
world are almost exclus
but it's very very much of a female
domain and so there are many many
behaviors whether consumer related or
not that could be then mapped onto the
reproductive module to your question.
Then there are two other modules that I
hinted at earlier
when I talked about gift giving. So
there's the kin selection module. These
are behaviors that are related to the
fact of I increase my inclusive fitness
by investing in my kin. Okay. And then
there is reciprocal altruism module
which is why would I ever jump into the
river? So if I jump into the river to
save my three children that's skin
selection because each of my three
children on average shares 50% of their
genes with me. So if in the service of
saving those three kids, I end up dying,
the evolutionary calculus is totally in
favor of me dying. Who cares?
Okay. On the other hand, why would I
jump into the river to save Stephen?
First of all, until we met today, you're
a stranger. Why would I ever save a
stranger? If you're not a stranger and
you're a friend, you but you're still
zero genetic relatedness. So there the
argument is is that it's due to
reciprocal altruism and that human
beings have evolved the mechanism of
reciprocity to oil our social bonds
to return a favor
to return a favor. So so literally the I
scratch your back, you scratch mine
literally comes from our primate cousin
species where you engage in reciprocal
grooming. So what happens? There are a
bunch of parasites that are all over my
fur that I can't get to. And so what I
do is I come stand and I give you my
back and you will sit there and pick at
all of it. Of course the expectation is
you'll now return the favor. So I
literally scratch your back and you
scratch mine. Now where did that
signature come from originally? One
argument is that imagine we are walking
around in the savannah where the most
common threat that we face life is
basically two things. I mean other than
sex, get dinner and make sure you don't
become somebody's there.
Mic drop. That's it. That's life. Okay.
So, one of the problems that we've all
faced, hence why we've evolved gustatory
preferences for high calorie foods is
caloric uncertainty and caloric
scarcity. We don't have a neighborhood
store to go buy our food. So, I might
actually die of starvation. Well, what
if we mitigate that risk whereby we set
up an insurance policy with non-kin,
another group of folks that are also
walking around Savannah? Hey, next time
that we bring down the big prey, that's
1,000 pounds of meat, we will share with
you, but hey, you do the right thing and
reciprocate back to us. So, now you
might say, okay, well, that's all nice,
fancy science, but how does that
manifest itself in in human consumer
behavior? Well, there are so many
behaviors that you and I engage in if
we're friends that are completely rooted
in that reciprocal module. So, for
example, when it's your birthday, I call
you and I invite you out to dinner. I
expect, unless you're a social cheat,
that when it's my birthday, you will
reciprocate. Now, from a strict economic
perspective, why don't we skip this
whole charade? I'm going to pay $70 for
your meal, you're going to pay $70 for
mine. We're going to end up at the same
spot. Let's not do it. The reason why we
have to do it is because that reciprocal
ritual is what oils our bonds of
affinity. And so there are many many
behaviors that we engage in that are
exactly tailoring that. So to summarize
much of our behaviors I argue in my
earlier books could be mapped onto one
of these four modules.
And in that earlier book the consuming
instinct you talk about a mate
desiraability score
right?
What is a mate desiraability score?
So imagine a car. A car is made up of
many attributes, right? So the car could
be what's its gas efficiency? What's the
strength of its uh uh engine? How well
does it hug the the the road? What's its
green? Is it a green car? Or does it
have bad exhaust? So So a car is a
multi-attribute product. It's made up of
many attributes. And then it could be
that the way that I choose which car I
pick is the one that scores the best on
the totality of those attributes. Okay,
that's called the multi-attribute
choice. Well, human beings are also
products made up of many attributes. So,
in the mating market, you and I, let's
say we do men now, but of course it
applies to women, too. There's a bunch
of attributes that we know that women
are going to either
like about us or not like about us.
Overwhelmingly, by the way, the number
one universal attribute that women seek
is anything that's related to social
status. Right? So, in other words, it
could be my ambition. It could be my
assertiveness. It could be my social
dominance. It could be literally the the
big diplomas I have behind my back. It
could be the number of zeros behind in
my bank. It could be how many cattle
heads I have if I'm Hadza tribe. But in
no culture has a woman ever said the
following. Give me a non assertive beta
meek man who has pear-shaped hips and a
nasal voice and I'm turning into a
sexual frenzied animal. That those words
have never been uttered in the history
of humanity. Okay. But what women will
say by the way it's not that they only
look for rich guys, right? Because many
women will be madly in love with the
starving artist. But the starving artist
is showing what?
Ambition.
Ambition. Assertiveness. There is a
trajectory of creation that's coming
around the corner. I'm going to become a
big rock star. But no, that's why by the
way if you do uh I I think that study
has been done where you and actually
some of my students in one of my classes
did a similar study for their project.
Just show a guy, exact same guy in a
personal ad. He's got a guitar or he
doesn't have a guitar. Nothing changed.
It's the exact same guy. It's Stephen.
But give me a guitar. No. Oh, with the
guitar, Steven's gorgeous. Without the
guitar, he's less gorgeous.
What's the other explanation for that
that people might jump to? They might
say, "Well, I like music, so that's why
I prefer Steven with a guitar and he's
going to play some songs and I'm going
to feel good and then I'm going to have
sex with him."
So, so that's a very good question. So
that is the difference between proximate
explanations and ultimate explanations.
Much of science operates at the
approximate level. It explains the how
and the what of a phenomenon. How does
diabetes work? What are the factors that
increase the likelihood of you having
diabetes? That's perfectly fine. The
ultimate explanation is the Darwinian
why. Why would the phenomenon have
evolved to be of that type? So you could
say, "I'm just drawn to a guy who knows
how to play music." You've just
explained proximate. It's like saying,
"Why have we evolved to have sex?"
Because it feels good. That's
approximate. The ultimate explanation is
that a sexually reproducing species has
to have a mechanism by which you're
drawn to engage in the behavior that
results in procreation. So it's not that
ultimate explanations are superior to
approximate ones. is that you need both
levels of analyses to fully explain a
phenomenon.
So what is going on there with the
guitar from an evolutionary perspective?
Why is the guitar attractive?
He's creative.
Yeah.
Uh he's got the assiduousness to have
the discipline to pi
virtuoso attractive all other or
Picasso. Picasso is a short little guy.
He's frumpy. He's bald. Yet he's got a
very very long line of very attractive
women saying, "Can can I have sex with
you, Picasso, tonight? How is that
possible?"
Is it because at some level we're
associating that talent with status?
Absolutely.
I the person that can play the piano at
the party probably has a lot of status.
They're going to have a lot of options.
100 as a matter I mean just listen to
famous rock stars and what they say as
to why they became musicians. I mean,
literally almost to the word. It's as if
they plagiarized each other. Oh, I
quickly realized that that's how I can
get the girls, right? They never said
it's because in my childhood, I grew up
listening to Bach and Mozart and it
tickled my auditory reflex, right? They
usually said, "Oh, I go to a party and I
break out the thing and the lineup
begins." And then Jean Simmons sleeps
with 5,000 girls and the lead singer of
Simple Red, who's a rather forgive me,
whatever your name is, He's ginger guy.
He's not exactly the model of my sexual
dreams if I'm a woman. But yet he was,
you know, with tons of women, right? But
to finish the point about mate
desiraability scale. So now imagine all
of those attributes that I can cook. So
okay, God sad. Well, I'm not tall. That
goes against me. But I'm not very hard
to look at. That goes for me. I play
soccer really well. I learned very
quickly when I was 15 that the best way
that you won't get bullied by anybody is
when you're the big soccer star. Okay.
Uh I've done pretty well in my life. So
there are some traits that I score badly
on and some traits that I can compensate
on. And so we can put them all into a
basket and say, okay, well, what on a
scale of 0 to 100, what would God score
on his mate desiraability scale? And so
that's what that scale is. It's
basically taking all of our attributes
and then saying what do you score is is
Stephen a 78 or a 92. Now here's what's
very interesting to to that question
which you didn't ask.
Humans engage in what's called
assortative mating. Assortative mating
is the idea that birds of a feather
flock together. So there are two maxims.
There's the birds of a feather flock
together and there's the opposites
attract. Opposites attract only works
well for short-term mating. I am
sexually koi and shy and I'm an
introvert. You're sexually daring and
extroverted. That complimentarity might
actually result in a nice tric behind
the bushes. But for long-term mating, if
you want to assure success of a
long-term marriage, then it's
overwhelmingly birds of a feather flock
together. And usually here what we mean
is we share similar values. We share
similar goals, similar mindsets. We
really have to assort on these. If I'm
an asserbic atheist and you're a
committed Catholic who views everything
through Jesus, it doesn't take a fancy
professor to know we're not starting on
the right foot. Okay. But here's the
other part about associative assortative
mating. This is actually something that
I first um proposed as an open question
many years ago on one of my appearances
of Joe Rogan and I received like a
hundred emails saying, "Oh, I want to do
that research with you." Which I still
haven't done, so maybe it'll happen now.
So, let me repeat it.
So, I argue that people assort based on
their overall mate desiraability score,
which is the question you asked. Meaning
if I'm an 87,
I'm unlikely because the mating market
is is literally a market. It's a market.
Okay?
If I'm an 87, I can command a girl or
expect a girl in the 80s. It wouldn't be
good for an 87 to go with a 36. We all
want to get the 100. Both men and women
want to get the 100. But what stops us
is that I don't score 100. So, I want to
get the gorgeous supermodel and so on,
but maybe I'm not good enough to get
her. And and and all women want to get
the highly accomplished gorgeous male
Olympic swimmer who's both Bronny and a
neurosurgeon, but they can't get him
because he's got the pick of the litter.
So, usually we end up assorting on our
mate value. But now here's the part
where I proposed as a hypothesis and it
it it's it's never been tested although
I discuss it in the happiness book. So I
argue I predict although I haven't
tested it that what will predict the
likelihood of a couple staying together
into the future is whether their mating
overall mating scores stay in line or
they begin to diverge. So, I'm the high
school quarterback, so all the girls
think I'm hot. I get to go to the prom,
whatever it's called, uh, with the
cheerleader, the head cheerleader. She's
the hot girl. I'm the king of the high
school. That's great. At that point,
when we're both 18, we assort on our
mating value. Now, let's fast forward 10
years later. The hot cheerleader is now
finishing her third year in
neurosurgery. Yes, there's a lot of hot
pretty smart looking male doctors. The
the hot quarterback when I was 18 has
become fat. He's lost his hair and he's
uh consistently unemployed and shows no
interest other than playing video games.
So, what's happened? When we first met
when we were 18, our mating values were
the same. But now hot cheerleader has
become neurosurgeon. Her score has gone
really up. Hot quarterback is now a
degenerate. Now there's a huge
difference in our mating scores. That's
going to put a huge stressor on our
marriage. So one of the things I argue
in the happiness book is yes, make sure
to meet someone who matches you in your
mating value and work hard at making
sure that you stay at the right mating
value. Once we get that divergence, I'm
predicting divorce.
Okay. The It's super interesting. The
question that springs to mind is
as men and women age, who tends to drop
in their desiraability score?
What do you think?
I don't know.
You want me to answer it because then I
can get the hate mail? No problem.
No, no, but I I asked that as well
because there's clearly some data on
who's asking for the divorces, who's
initiating the divorces, who's cheating
the most. That would
so women are overwhelmingly the ones to
instigate a divorce.
Yeah,
that's true.
Although from a strict evolutionary
perspective,
the mate val all other things equal maid
value of men goes up with age. Mate
value of women goes down with age. Now,
here is how you reduce your chances in
the mating market if you're a woman. You
ready? Of course, just aging. Yes.
Number one. Number two, if you're tall,
that's a death blow. Why? Because wh
it's not that women want only tall guys
because then
we all the other guys would we would
have been twiddling our thumbs in
frustrated celibacy. But women want a
guy who's taller than them. That's
what's guaranteed. There was actually a
study done a few years ago now where
they looked at 720
actual couples. Guess how many violated
that norm? Women taller than men out of
720.
I don't know.
One.
One out of 720.
One. Right. So, women, it it's a it's a
non-starter that a woman doesn't want a
shorter guy than her. She might I mean,
Lionel Messi is my height, but he's
Lionel Messi, and he found a gorgeous
woman who's shorter than him, right? But
what you don't want now, if I'm a 6'1
woman, now of course they are still 6'2
and taller men, but just statistically
speaking, we've just shrunk the possible
pool. There's a gorgeous guy, super
handsome, very funny, very educated,
who's 5'8, but I'm 6'1. I tower over
him. If I wear heels and I add another
four inches, he becomes my son. Well,
this all brings to light something else
which has been discussed a few times on
this show, which is if we said there
that men's mate desiraability score
stays pretty consistent
unless all goes up unless they do
something very bad. But the kind of
inverse conversation there is that
women's desiraability scores are now
higher than ever when they're younger
than ever. Yeah.
So you've got and I believe from what
I've been told that the male's
desiraability score is now lower than
ever if we think about income
age groups
in the lower age groups. So if you think
about income um differences, if you
think about educational differences,
who's graduating from college, who's
smarter and all these kinds of things
because of the very important changes
that have happened in society, um men
and women are getting closer and closer
to par here.
Yeah. Which means that the I mean
someone on the podcast described it to
me as the tall woman problem, but it can
also be described as the small man
problem.
Well, and it's small. It's small and
tall. Not I was going to finish. Yeah.
It's not just the height. So I said
death blow would be you get older,
you're tall and you're very educated.
So, if you are a 38-year-old
6'2
PhD from Stanford and you're a woman,
good luck. Why? Because number one, I've
gotten older, so there's a smaller pool,
right? Uh, number two, I'm tall. I want
a taller guy. Number three, when I'm a
PhD, I'm a woman now. When I'm a PhD, I
want a guy who is as educated and
accomplished as me or more. So now I
need to find a 6'4 guy who's also a PhD.
Right? Here's the paradox by the way
that people don't realize. People think
that oh the reason why women always
desire high status guy that this is
[__] It's not true. Is because
historically they have been dominated by
the patriarchy. So they sought that
which they didn't have. And that's
completely falsified by the fact that
very high status women actually insist
more on the guy being higher status. So
if it were, so for example, if I am a
neurosurgeon and a diplomat and I'm a
woman, I don't say, "Oh, well, now that
I have all that I need, let me look for
the illiterate 17-year-old Cabana boy
who can't read three words cuz that's
what I want." No, she even wants She
insists more on the guy being meeting
her or higher in status. So if I'm if
I'm older, tall, and super educated,
it's a death blow.
What does this all say about what's
going on with masculinity at the moment?
Because um when I've said this a few
times on the show, but when you look at
the stats around suicidality amongst
men, um when you look at mental health
issues amongst men, when you look at
some of the influencers that men are now
drawn to more than ever that are
offering a new vision of masculinity,
there's clearly some kind of transition,
something going on in society at the
moment as it relates to what it is to be
a man. You you said this thing about
beta male earlier on. No one wants a
beta male. Well,
you know, it feels like there has been a
narrative that has encouraged a bit more
beta maleness in society and we're
seeing a bit of like a counter movement.
I've had so many women, some of which
have been on the show, say to me that
they've got a young son, um, and they
are confused about the advice they
should be giving their young son in such
a world. I get tons of women who write
to me and and ask me sort of the f I'm
paraphrasing
where where are the bold men, right? I I
I go to a place I'm looking super,
you know, ready to meet people. I'm easy
to look at and no one approaches me.
Well, if you inculcate over many
generations that if I approach you and
say, "My god, my name is God, you you
look lovely. What a beautiful dress."
That's a compliment becomes a form of
compliment rape. Then is it surprising
that I may be a bit ambivalent in
approaching you? I mean I I often joke
that given some of the what is now
considered hashtagme too Italy should
cease to exist because the whole country
is hashtagme too right what do I mean by
that Italians stereotypically of course
are seducers they pursue women I mean
women will say you I love Italian guys
how they approach now we're not talking
about uh you know being persistent to
the point that they're harassing you
that they're pinning you down physically
but there is a dynamic of courtship
whereby men who are bold, men who
approach, men who take chances, who are
confident are going to get the pretty
girl. Well, now imagine if you create a
dynamic
in for all sorts of reasons, one of
which is radical feminism, the other one
of which is to pathize half of humanity
called men through the label of toxic
masculinity. No, it's called sexiness. a
guy who jumps into a a building to save
a puppy and he's called a fireman.
That's what we fantasize about. That's
not toxic masculinity. That's
masculinity, right? And so, a lot of
women will write to me and say, "Where
are those men, professor?" Well, those
men are too afraid to come out. I I'll
give you a couple of examples. Okay?
At my university, we now have a
mandatory sexual training module that we
have to take otherwise we can't
continue, right? It's it's part of like
you you know you have to October 15th to
get the refresher because until my
benevolent
kind employer taught me how to speak to
women, I was clueless. So the first 57
years of my life, I walked around as a
Middle Eastern savage, not knowing how
to interact with women. Of course, I'm
being sarcastic, right? But then the my
benevolent employer came along and
through very very cute, condescending,
and patronizing
cartoon vignettes,
they teach me how to act. So, you know,
a compliment that is in the wrong
context could be a form of sexual
violence. So, for example, uh you're
walking down the street and you see a
guy complimenting an a woman and it
appears that she's not uh welcoming that
compliment. Is that sexual violence? And
so, I will first just to test the
algorithm say no. And then it comes out,
ooh, I understand why you might be but
that is a form. Are you with me?
Yes. So now I'm 59 with a big
personality. This kind of [__]
doesn't get to me. That's why I speak
openly and publicly to the chagrin of
all of academia. But the 21-year-old who
doesn't have that same strength of
personhood. Do you think he's going to
think twice before at the next party
walking up to a girl mustering up all
his courage to ask her if she wants a
coffee? Of course he is. So I think
that's where that problem of dynamic
comes from. And I'm now going to share a
personal story with one one of my
brothers which is also in the happiness
book which speaks to when you're the
opposite of the non-bold timid guy.
One of my brothers uh has been in
Southern California since 1984. He
became very very successful and wealthy.
Uh was an Olympian uh judoka. He he
represented Lebanon in the 1976
Olympics. The reason why that's relevant
is because physically he's very
dominant, but my brother is 2 feet tall.
Obviously not, but he's he's shorter
than me. He's Okay. I'm like 5'6, 5'7. I
mean, he's maybe five three. Okay.
But but a bulldog, right? I always like
to say just because then it makes it
easy. I say I mess his height. So that
makes it easy.
Okay. So, uh, he's not Messi's height.
He's shorter than Messi's height. He's
shorter than Meridana, right? So, but he
walks like he's seven feet tall. Okay.
So, we used to in the early 90s, I would
come visit him. He he used to live in in
Newport Beach where we are now. And we'd
go to clubs. I'm I'm single at that
point. And my brother would say, "All
right, God. We're going to play the
game." I'm like, "Oh, his name is Dave."
No, David. I'm not in the mood. Find the
most beautiful and unattainable girl
here. Oh, come on, man. I don't want to
do this. Do it. Okay. All right. So, I
look around. So, now I want to find not
only the prettiest girl. I want to find
an impediment to you getting her. What's
an impediment? A really doineering
looking man that she's with. Therefore,
that makes it even less likely that you
can get her. Yes.
Okay, David. I found her. The the girl
over there with the high heels in the
middle of the dance floor. That's the
one. You sure got? Yes. That's the one.
Okay. He stands there.
Dominant tattooed guy goes to the
bathroom.
David in great white shark mode goes up
to the girl. She with her high heels.
He's coming up to here. I just Okay.
Haha. I hear them smiling. He comes back
to me complete cold. Says she'll call me
tomorrow. [__] David. No way. Zero
chance. It's not happening. Next day.
Come. Come. This is kind of an Arabic
thing. Come.
Hi, David. It's Candy. We met yesterday.
The thing I'm looking forward to meeting
you. How did he do it, Stephen? He did
it because testicles this big. He's 7
foot2
in his aura.
Now, you might say, well, yeah, boy does
it add a lot of inches metaphorically
when you have Ferraris and so on. But
there's a more general story here. He
owns the world. He walks like he owns
it, right? But he's not of great. So, if
you ask women, yeah, it' be great if I'm
6'2 and I walk big, but I could be 6'2
and very meek and very tepid and very
beta. Or I could be 5'7 and I'm messy.
most are going to go for messy. So
that's what I mean by the way when I say
that mating is a compensatory choice.
Compensatory means that it to your
earlier point about made desiraability,
we are judged on a basket of goods. If
it were that we're only judged in a
non-compensatory way, meaning so for
example, if it were that women say, "I
always go out with the tallest guy,"
then there's no way for me to compensate
for that. my humor won't get me higher
score, my looks won't get me, my
education, my accomplishment, I'm dead
because there's there are a lot of
taller guys. But if the way you choose
me is as a function of how I score on a
basket of goods, then I might have a
shot. So that's why I tell people, by
the way, that even though we all score
poorly on some things, but there's a
whole bunch of other things that we that
is within our possibility to improve. I
guarantee you for all that you are, if
you improve on assertiveness, ambition,
if your vocabulary changes so that when
you sit at a party, people can judge you
by the way within the first few
sentences that you say. Just your
elocution, the vocabulary that you use,
the the thoughtfulness of your answers.
I can very quickly judge where you are
where I could put you in the in the in
the pigeon hole. So there are way you
know what why don't you crack a book and
read a bit right why don't you stop
playing video games
on this point of masculinity the just
further upstream a little bit we talked
about men approaching women now I have
to present the counter narrative to this
because I don't think most men
understand what it is to be a beautiful
woman and and what they go through on a
daily basis this um ITV made a piece se
I think seven days ago I saw it on on X
or Twitter um which showed what it's
like to be a a beautiful woman walking
down the
Um, this was only 7 days ago. There's
been a variety of different videos like
this, but I'll just play it for you so
you can see.
What's going on?
I'm filming undercover alone in Cardiff,
where police recently announced a
decrease in violence against women.
Within seconds, a group of men
approached me.
I play tennis.
Yeah.
This guy didn't respect my personal
space.
I don't mean to be rude or anything, but
I saw you. I had to say hello. You look
nice.
That's kind of my friend.
That's fine.
The guy in the black t-shirt sees me up
ahead and speeds up to get next to me.
And like many others, he overstays his
welcome.
I think I'll be okay.
20 people approach me in just 2 hours.
Now, I don't think men realize that that
that's the nature of what a woman goes
through. So, in the context of this
conversation about,
no, we do have to be on the front foot
if we are going to find a mate. When you
understand that that's what that
beautiful woman that you're thinking
about going up to has already gone
through it does change your you know
I got you but I I've got an a ready
deployed answer for that life is about
modulation right saying the right thing
in the right way at the right time right
I'm sort of paraphrasing a quote of
Aristotle which in in the per not the
person in the happiness book I have a
whole chapter that is going to address
your beautiful woman story. So I talk
about the inverted U. Uh does that ring
a bell? Do you know what that is? The
inverted U.
I can imagine on a graph.
On a graph, but not not this way.
Oh, sorry. Yeah, the other way. Like a
hill,
right? So the inverted U is basically
the the mathematical representation of
something that certainly the ancient
Greeks taught us long ago, but they
weren't the only ones to say this. You
know, everything in moderation, right?
So Aristotle in his golden mean argument
said look if you have let's say a uh
soldier who's very cowardly meek lacking
courage that's not good. If you have a
soldier who is so bold rash reckless in
his risk takingaking that's not good
either. So too little is not good too
much is not good and the sweet spot is
in the middle. So in the happiness book
I have an entire cha chapter whereby I
argue that everything in life the number
one universal rule of optimal
flourishing is to find the sweet spot
irrespective of any context that you're
talking about and then I demonstrate it
through a bewildering number of examples
at the neuronal level at the individual
level at the societal level okay so now
let's apply that principle to here right
those guys are at the other end of the
curve, right? Knowing when to act in the
right way, at the right time, in the
right measure, that they're not doing
that because the likelihood of that
beautiful girl when you come up and act
like a rather harassing buffoon in that
context of her saying, "You know what?
I'm sold. Let's have massive sex behind
that tree right now." Right? Therefore,
we know that statistically speaking,
that approach is never going to work.
It's done for no other purpose than to
harass. Whereas when I'm at a party
where we are supposed to be mingling and
I come up to you and I say, "Forgive me.
I hope you don't mind. I just want to
say gorgeous dress." Does that seem like
what I just said is similar to how
they're acting? So life is about
modulation and those guys are certainly
not modulated. Obviously, there's a
bunch of things that are clearly
violations there. Um, of everything
you've just said about the right place,
the right time, they they look drunk.
Uh, it's very late. She's alone, so
she's in a position of vulnerability in
many respects. So, rolling up to her in
such a way is But from the from the male
perspective, you said the probability of
getting a good outcome there is so low.
But from the male perspective there,
they're probably thinking, listen, if
the probability is 0.001,
why not?
I'll take it. They're probably thinking
that. Well, by the way, perhaps, but if
you were an empathetic person, you'd say
the fact that she may feel threatened is
enough reason
not to. Yeah.
Not to do it.
Therefore, to me, they're all [__]
I agree. And I I at the heart of this
though is this idea of self-awareness.
Exactly.
Because the men that rolled up there,
they might in their own heads think they
have a chance. They might like have a
distorted view of their probability. I
mean, one of them rolled up and said,
"Hey, uh, do you want some tennis
lessons? I'm a tennis coach." And from
what I saw in the video, he was a good
30, 40 years older than her.
Yeah.
And in his head, he must have thought
that the effort he's exerting there is
worth the probability that he's assumed
because there's just like no
self-awareness. And I think at the heart
of this is like, how do you build that
that self-awareness to know? Oh, I I
love that you're asking this because one
of the things that frustrates me the
most in social interactions is when so
I'm not a beautiful woman, so I don't
get that violation, but I get a million
other violations for all sorts of
reasons. One of which is that people do
recognize me a lot and they do come up.
So they don't do it because they're
trying to get me behind the bushes. But
then they'll stop me and lecture for the
next 25 minutes about whatever idea
they're having in their head. Now, I'm
polite. I'm thankful that people
appreciate my work and will come up. But
I didn't sign up while I'm walking with
my children and wife for you to lecture
me for 25 minutes uninterrupted without
me saying a word. If you come up and
say, "Oh, I read the perfect mine.
Professor, loved it. Do you mind if I
take a picture with you?" I'm always
gracious. I'm always but so all of those
social phauas almost all of them could
be linked to what you said which is a
complete lack of self-awareness which
let's break it down even more.
There is a concept in uh psychology uh
called theory of mind. Are are you
familiar with it? No. Theory of mind is
a ability that you must have in order to
have meaningful social interaction. What
does theory of mind mean? When I'm
chatting with you, I have to be able to
put myself in your mind. So, for
example, if I'm talking to an audience
that knows nothing about evolutionary
psychology, I might alter the specific
words I use because I have theory of
mind that makes me say they don't know
what domain specific computational
systems would be. If I use those words,
I just lost not because they're dumb,
but because they don't know that jargon.
So, I already exhibited a good
communicator skill, which is I put
myself in the theory of mind of my
audience and I modulate my message
depending on who I'm speaking to. Well,
autistic children, by the way, fail on
theory of mind. So, one of the ways that
you are able to diagnose because autism,
you can't give a blood test that shows,
oh, there's a marker of autism. So the
way that you typically uh diagnose
autism early is through various tasks
that they go through. So there is a task
for children that you suspect might be
autistic where they will fail on such a
test which makes sense intuitively
because you know that autistic children
don't have very good social skills are
emotionally withdrawn don't read cues
well. So, for example, if I'm sitting
with you for 25 minutes while you
lecture me about why Camala Harris is a
great president. I didn't sign up for
that. You want to shake my hand? That's
great. Now, you can tell if you're not
if you are self-aware that I'm getting
impatient. You should be able to tell
that my children are starting to shuffle
uncomfortably because they're getting
impatient. But you're just as oblivious
as those [__] So so many of social
interactions are because of people's
lack of self-awareness. And I am shocked
by the extent to which most people lack
self-awareness. So it's not that 95% of
the people that I meet are unbelievably
socially gracious and it's only the 5%
degenerates that are bad. It's the
opposite.
But then there's a there's an
explanation for that.
Okay, go. Because the ones that did have
the self-awareness never came up.
Right. Okay. Oh, so therefore I'm only
exposed to the bad
instances. So the ones that have the
self-awareness in the theory of mine,
saw you walk past with your family and
went he's with his family, love his
work, but I'm not going to roll upon him
with his family.
You're exactly right. By the way, that's
the exact same mechanism that explains
something called the overconfidence
bias, which is a cognitive bias whereby
we overestimate something in an over. So
for example, if you ask most professors,
so do you think that you your uh your
teaching uh ability is it below average,
average or above average? 90% of
professors say above average. Well,
statistically that can be. Well, why
does that happen? It's exactly for what
you said. The the students who thought I
was great took the time to come up to me
and say, "Professor, love the course."
The ones who thought I was an [__]
they didn't come up to me. So what did
my brain code? Only the great ones. and
therefore I must be great.
When you're trying to build something,
the problem that we all face is we need
talent and skills that we don't have
ourselves. And we can waste so much time
trying to learn a new skill when really
what we should be doing is using a
platform like fiverr.com where you have
global access to reviewed, tried and
tested, world-class talent at your
fingertips that you can access in a
flexible and affordable way. Fiverr for
me when I was starting out in business
was a real unlock. It was a bit of a
hack because I used to think that the
only way for me to add skills to my
project was by hiring full-time staff
and bringing them into the office.
Fiverr.com changes that. And if you're
in that position now where there's a
skill you're missing for a project that
matters to you, here's what you have to
do. Visit fiverr.com/diary
to learn more. And here's the great
thing. If it doesn't go well, Fiverr
offer a pretty amazing money back
guarantee. So what are you waiting for?
What if the way you present yourself
isn't appealing to the world? And again,
this brings us back to this idea of like
being a beta male. And when you say beta
male, what we're saying that what is the
definition of beta male? It's
so yes, it's used colloially. Beta male
would be none of the markers that uh
exhibit the types of qualities that
women would find attractive you possess.
So it could be social dominance, it
could be physical dominance, it could be
high status, it could be assertiveness,
could be ambition, it could be look uh
one of the reasons why women say I I
love I'm very attracted to a funny man,
a funny guy. What what they're
effectively saying is I want an
intelligent man. Because it's very very
unlikely that you could be a very funny
satist if you're not intelligent. Dave
Chappelle is probably smarter than a lot
of my colleagues, but they have a lot of
degrees. But he wouldn't be able to
stand up in front of an audience, keep
their attention for an hour and a half
on really powerful social commentary
where they pay $150 to come if he wasn't
if he weren't incredibly intelligent.
Right? So, so beta and and alpha doesn't
just mean tall and dominant and I have a
club and I beat you with it. It means,
do you exude the types of cues that on
average in the mating market people
would say, "God damn, that's an
attractive guy." Whatever that means.
That's that's how I define it.
So, if you had to give advice then to
men and women who were intent on being
higher value and higher status, how what
would that advice be and how would it
differ? Some of the advice will be
exactly the same for both sexes. Yeah.
But some of the advice would be sex
specific in recognition that not of not
all of the mating attributes are equally
desired by the opposite sex. Right? So
for example,
no man has ever uttered the following
words. Linda,
you have a gorgeous body. I'm
unbelievably sexually drawn to you, but
you're not exhibiting the type of
elacrity to improve your GPA score, and
your lack of assertiveness in your
studies suggests that I'm not going to
have sex with you tonight. No man has
ever uttered those words. But a lot of
women meet a super hot guy at a club. He
opens his mouth and what comes out is
[__] imbecility and suddenly the sex
opportunity has just shut down. So why
am I saying all this? There are some
traits that if men were to work on
that's going to bring them more bang for
the buck than if women worked on other
ones both. So for example, kindness and
intelligence are universal traits
equally desired by both men and women.
So that's that's true for both men and
women across cultures. But social status
is preferred by women in men in every
known culture. Physical beauty and youth
is preferred by men over women in every
culture. So So some traits the advice
would be the same. some traits it'll be
sex specific.
I wonder because I'm trying to give I'm
trying to figure out how to give advice
to that bottom 50% of men that are
basically having no sex,
right?
Which I'm told about over and over again
that are at risk of becoming incelss or
playing video games in their room that
are turning to pornography as a
medicine, I guess, and an antidote to
their lives. What kind of advice would
you offer to those those sort of
disillusioned men? Is that guy also 90
pounds overweight and pear-shaped?
Probably not in shape.
Okay. So, you know what? Hit the
treadmill. Looks matter. They don't
matter to women as much as they do to
men, but you know, I my my wife often
jokes with me. I don't I don't know if
you've ever seen this on on the
internet. I will often post, you know,
in a joking manner, a photo of me from
1985 in actually in Southern California
in in in San Diego where I'm in my
soccer physique days where I have the
eight pack and the V and the whole
thing. Right? And my wife would joke
with me. She said, "How come I never got
that version of Gad?" Right? Now, that
doesn't mean she obviously stayed with
me when I was, you know, 86 pounds
heavier. So, it's not the only thing,
but boy is it better to have this six or
eight pack than not have it. So, uh my
height I can't change, right? So, I
can't tell those guys that are
potentially going to be in sales, you
know, please try to grow 4 in, right?
But again, crack a book. So, for
example, even with my own children,
right? You would think having the father
that they have, they're born, they come
out of the womb, and they're reading.
You know how hard it is for me to get
them to get away from this damn thing?
Right. It's it's it's it's one of the
biggest frustrations I have as a parent.
And and as I said earlier, they're
they're very graceful. They're very
poised. Probably compared to other
children, they're a lot more
knowledgeable. But it's not a reflex for
them to say of all things that I could
do right now, I want to go to a room and
read. Whereas it is a reflex that I
still have today with complete full
dedication. So read more, learn how to
speak better. There there again mating
is a compensatory process. There are
things that I can't change about me. I
can't change my height. I can't change
the symmetry or lack thereof in my face.
But if I'm thinner, all other things
equal. I'm probably going to be better.
So, it's never a lost cause. Wherever I
am in my mating desiraability score,
there are always effective intervention
strategies that could improve my score.
So, I'm I'm currently at a 42. I think
that if I do strategies ABC, I could
probably get up to 60. and 60 is going
to open me up to a lot more desirable
women than when I was 42.
We we talked a little bit earlier about
um pornography. I think I I said the
word once, but I found it quite
interesting. You know, we talked a
little bit about sexual variety
that
you make a case that porn in some ways
might be good for us.
Not quite. I say, so I say that porn, it
makes perfect evolutionary sense that
porn is a behavioral trap that can lead
to addiction. So, I'm not saying it's
good for you. I'm not saying that we've
evolved to specifically consume porn,
but here's what porn is doing. So, in in
evolutionary theory, there is a
distinction between an adaptation and an
exaptation. And adaptation is something
that has evolved because it confers
either survival or uh reproductive
benefits. So my preference for fatty
foods is an adaptation that's linked to
survival. My uh desire to use high
status products to impress the ladies is
a behavioral trait that helps me in the
mating market. Okay. An exaptation, not
to be confused with an adaptation, is
when there is a phenomenon that
piggybacks on an adaptation itself. It
serves no purpose. Do you follow what I
mean? So for example, the color of our
skeletal system is not an adaptation.
There were already path dependent
engineering solution that led to the
fact that our skeletal color is the way
that it is. It's it's not itself an
adaptation. How would you use this in
and I'm going to come to pornography in
a second. For example, you could say
religion is an adaptation.
If you want to say that, this is what
you'd have to argue. Groups that are
religious by virtue of their religiosity
exhibit greater communality, greater
cohesion, greater in-group outgroup
demarcation. So groups that are
religious tend to outlive groups that
are irrel irreligious. So that would be
an adaptive argument for why religion
evolved. An exaptation argument for why
religion evolved is that religion solves
no adaptive function, but rather it
piggybacks on systems that already exist
in my brain. So for example, I already
come with the brain that's coalitional.
I view the world as blue team, red team.
There's us, there's them. That's already
a mechanism that's built into my brain
for other reasons. And now religion
comes along and piggybacks on that,
right? The Jews have the Jews and the
Gentiles. The Christians have the
believers who are going to be with Jesus
in in heaven and the rest of you
[__] who are going to burn in hell.
The the Muslims have the believers and
the kufur, which is a derogatory term
for non-Muslims. So all of those
religions have at least Abrahamic
religions have the same structure of us
versus them. So with that background,
pornography is not something that
specifically evolved in us because there
there was no pornography in in the
ancestral savannah. But we for example
men have evolved a preference for visual
stimuli.
Men have evolved a greater pension for
sexual variety.
Now, there's a product that piggybacks
on those innate preferences that says,
"Hey, guess what? There's a screen where
I'm going to take you where you could
shop for as many new mobile, fertile,
ready young women, and you never have to
see the same woman twice if you serve
for the next 600 years. My brain has
been hijacked." So, pornography is not
something that we've evolved a gene for.
But pornography utilizes existing
systems to trap us. That's why, by the
way, in two of my earlier books, I talk
about the evolutionary roots of dark
side consumption. Dark side consumption
are maladaptive behaviors like
pornographic addictions, pathological
gambling, eating disorders, compulsive
buying. So I explain how these
maladaptive behaviors have a biological
signature. I was reading Psychology
Today with the the study with 688
young Danish adults who were surveyed
and respondents viewed the viewing of
porn um hardcore pornography as
beneficial to their sex lives, their
attitudes
um towards sex, their perceptions and
attitudes towards members of the
opposite sex and toward life in general.
So I guess the question here is is
pornography when we think about our
evolution and the implications of us
consuming pornography and the behavior
that it then turns into is it a net good
or a net
that's a good one and well the research
is unclear on this so I've seen studies
that have exactly to your point have
said hey you know what it spices things
up as long as you do it openly you know
uh again it's a question of modulation
remember I said doing it at the right
time right amount the right context and
so on, right? If once in a while, for
whatever reason, whether it be alone or
in the context of a couple, you decide
to incorporate pornography to spice
things up, good for you. If you can't
get to work on time cuz you're spending
6 hours uh feverishly uh masturbating to
pornography and then you don't have the
sexual vigor to then be intimate with
your partner, then we have a problem,
right? So many psychiatric conditions
that are rooted in in behavioral
dysfunction,
if they're done at the right amount,
they're not a problem. It's when they go
on the bad side of the curve. Let me
give you a again a a big uh a big view
of this problem. OCD,
obsessivecompulsive disorder, is a
psychiatric condition and it can
manifest itself in different obsessions
or different compulsions. So obsession
could be uh I'm engaging what's called
ruminative thinking, right? Did did I
say something at yesterday's party that
was stupid and now everybody thinks I'm
a [__] Now I will start to try to
speak to everybody at the party in a
ruminative obsessive way to make sure
that I didn't say anything. Now compare
that to germ contamination fear as a
form of OCD. I will now wash my hands
repetitively 600 times to make sure that
I didn't get uh infected by anything
when I shook somebody's hand. Right now,
there is an evolutionary adaptive
version of that which is scanning the
environment for environmental threats
once
is at the right level of behavioral
regulation. Right? Check the back door
that it's locked. Wash your hands once
when you shook many hands at the party.
But then what happens to the person who
doesn't suffer from OCD? There's a
warning flag that goes up in your head.
Then you tend to that flag. And what
happens to the flag? It goes down and
it's finished. The OCD person, the flag
is hyperactive in an infinite loop. I
wash my hands, flag goes down. As I walk
away from the sink, flag goes back up. I
wash my hands again. I am stuck in a
repetitive ritual for 8 hours in
scolding hot water where the skin is
coming off me. I didn't go to work cuz
I've been washing my hands since 7:00 in
the morning. That's what happens with
pornographic addiction, right? I'm
sitting and surfing the internet 6 hours
for porn. So, it is at the disregulation
part of that behavior. So, it's not that
there's anything innately evil or
diabolical or bad with surfing porn once
in a while, but it's once in a while. 6
hours a day, we have a problem. A lot of
men that watch pornography, and I've had
this said to me a few times, um feel an
immense amount of shame
um about the behavior. They they wish
they didn't. If they could if they could
press a button or write down who they
want to be, they probably would be
someone that wasn't watching
pornography. I think that's probably a
safe assumption to make as a general
rule. And the other thing that I've
heard is that because of the dopamine
receptors in our brain, it's going to
kind of um dampen our in real life
sexual attraction and performance and
cause to lead in erectile dysfunction.
All those things are certainly uh
plausible, right? I mean uh
and also motivation. made the motivation
argument to me if you start messing with
your dopamine in such a way that's the
same dopamine and same sort of I guess
chemical set you need to go and pursue.
Exactly right. And are those people that
that you're talking about are they are
they ones that we would classify as
being in a dysfunction or even if they
watch porn once every four weeks they're
feeling great shame and they're self
flagagillating.
I don't know. It was actually was I got
told this by a I do get DMs from guys
that are continually asking me to have
more conversations about pornography
because there's shame associated with
it. When I looked at the Google search
terms, the most frequent search term in
the category that I searched was how do
I quit pornography?
And it was by by a way it was it was the
astoundingly the most searched thing as
it related to pornography, which is how
do I quit?
And the question itself is quite
desperate,
right? So that makes me think that they
are in the wrong side of that curve,
right? They're already in disregulation
mode because if it were something that
I'm It's kind of like I I eat one bad
thing a month. That doesn't seem to be a
bad issue. If I eat three bad things
every single day, I will wake up 86
pounds overweight. Right? So again,
Aristotle taught us right thing, the
right place, and the right amount. So I
don't think that there's a deontological
rule and we can if you want explain what
that means. There is no deontological
rule that says under all circumstances
any porn consumption is diabolical and
evil. I don't think that's true. Now
maybe also I'm not a religious Puritan.
Maybe if you're a religious Puritan you
say not even watching one second of porn
you're the devil. But from a from a non
sort of judgmental, non-puritanical
thing. Hey, listen. Uh you've been
outside of a I mean, forgive me. I'm
going to be very direct. You're not in a
relationship. It's been uh 6 months
since your last sexual encounter. You
have certain libidinal drives. You
decide to sit and watch some porn that
one time. I don't think that makes you
Lucifer. But if you spend six hours a
day every day while your wife is saying,
"Hey, are we going to get some sexy time
tonight?" And you go, "My refractory
period is such refractory is what
happens when is the time between your
last ejaculation and when you can get
hard again." Well, if I just masturbated
five times today, I'm probably not going
to be up for it at night. And so again,
it's a question of is it a dysfunction
or is it part of the regular norm of
behavior. So I don't think people have
to feel so guilty about watching porn
once in a while.
What do you think I I should say to my
future son about the world that he's
growing up in in terms of the mismatch
between our evolution and
his natural hard wiring?
Wow, what a great question. So there is
a there is something called the mismatch
hypothesis in evolutionary theory which
basically says that many problems that
we face today arise out of a mismatch of
a phenomenon that was adaptive in our
ancestral past but is no longer adaptive
in our contemporary modern world.
Classic example to stick to food. We've
evolved the gustatory preferences to as
a response to caloric scarcity and
caloric uncertainty. Therefore, being
attracted to fatty foods, gorging on a
lot of food makes perfect evolutionary
sense when we don't know when our next
meal is coming from. When we live in an
environment of plentitude, then that
exact phenomenon becomes maladaptive. So
if you look at for example I think the
top eight or nine killers on the World
Health Organization thing they can all
be attributed to the mismatch
hypothesis. So I would tell your son
knowledge is power to our earlier point
of view getting that degree you never
lose in knowing more you being aware of
the mismatch hypothesis dear son will
allow you to hopefully not fall as
easily into behavioral traps. And what
are the most important because you have
a book here called happiness, eight
secrets for leading the good life. If I
was to give him advice on how to live a
happy life,
what are the most important things that
I should be aiming at?
So I I look at both decisions that we
can make for happiness and mindsets. So
let me maybe discuss a few of each. So
by far the two choices that will either
impart upon me the greatest happiness or
the greatest misery is choice of spouse
and choice of profession. Okay.
And let's break it down very simply.
If I wake up next to a person in the bed
and I go, "Oh, god damn, not this one
again." I'm not off to a good start. If
I wake up next to this to to that person
and I go, "Oh my god, how did I pull
that off? What a delight to wake up next
to this person?" Well, that's good.
Have they empirically measured this?
Have they
Not not in the way I'm explaining the
anecdote. Uh, now if I go off after I
woke up to this lovely person, I go off
and do things in my day-to-day
activities that make me do existential
glee. Oh boy, what a great day I have
lined up. I'm going to be working on my
next book. I've got uh I've got uh diary
of a CEO that's going to be super fun. A
lot of new people are going to hear
about some of my ideas. Then I'm going
to maybe have a chat with a graduate
student on some really exciting research
I'm doing. So, wow. Oh, yeah. I mean
there's a lot of stress but it's all
gives me a lot of purpose and meaning
and then at night I return to that
lovely person. I've cracked the the the
happiness code right now. Of course the
question is if the devil's in the
details what can I do to maximize my
chances that I make those right choices.
I explain in the book contrary to 99.9%
of the quote self-help prescriptive
books where they tell you exactly with
guarantee here are the eight steps. I
explained that life is a statistical
game, right? It there are statistical
vagory. So all I can do is increase your
odds of obtaining happiness. I can't
guarantee anything, right? You could
never smoke and get lung cancer, but not
smoking certainly reduces your chances
of lung cancer greatly. So earlier I
mentioned birds of a feather flock
together versus opposites attract.
Overwhelmingly, if you want to increase
your chances of a happy marriage,
remember the maximum birds of a feather
flock together. Complimentarity works
really nicely in the short term. It
doesn't sustain a long-term marriage.
The butterflies, the hormones don't last
when you've been in a marriage. That
doesn't mean you're not still sexually
attracted to your partner 25 years
later, but that's not going to carry the
train.
Okay. Okay. So, but just to give a
little bit more, I guess spec
specificity and nuance to this. You're
not cuz my partner, she's really into
like spiritual stuff. Yes.
She's really into like crystals and lots
of things that I'm not into. I think we
have a great relationship. We've been
together a long time.
And she's like I'm into Manchester
United and soccer. She's not into that.
Well, we might have to have you revisit
that because I'm a Manchester City guy,
but go ahead.
Okay. Well, that's the end of the
podcast. So, yeah. Um,
my apologies. No. Uh, look, I'm not
suggesting that there aren't
clear differences in a but if I were to
distill, if I were to to use statistical
term, if I were to factor analyze your
most fundamental life principles between
you and your partner, do you think
you're more alike or more different?
We're more alike. We're we're aligned.
That's my point.
Yeah. And this is why I say it because
when people hear it, they might think of
it as like tastes. No, it's not about
taste. It's not about the most
fundamental deontolog, right? I mean
what you know my wife loves the fact
that I'm a trutht teller. My love my
wife loves the fact that I have purity
in my right she appreciates the fact
that you know and similar with her like
for example we both have never been the
type to seek to trigger jealousy in the
other. Many people will will will say,
"Oh, you know, if when you trigger
jealousy, that spices things up, right?
My wife has never a single time done a
single thing, right?" But that's because
she has a standard of personal conduct
that's very elevated. Well,
can I ask you as well in there, just are
there things about your wife that you
don't have as much, but are fundamental
values, but you're drawn to because
she's kind of giving you them? I call
her MacGyver. Do you know do you
remember who Macgyver was?
Macgyver was a show in the 1980s, I
think, where he was reputed to be able
to put things together. He he he's in a
pickle. He's in a cell. So he takes soap
and cuts it up to cut the bar. He right
my wife at a complete reversal of the
typical stereotypes of male and female.
You give my wife an empty can of tuna
and a soccer ball, she'll make a rocket
and she'll fly you to Mars. She is
unbelievably in French you say de bruya.
Uh she knows how to put things together
and so on. And I'm just mesmerized by
her ability to do for me for all my
fancy academic stuff. Uh take a light
bulb. It'll probably take me four weeks
before I figure how it works. She's
already built a rocket. is basically
Elon Musk of the sad household. I
greatly admire that in her and it's
something that I possess very little.
I wanted to ask one of the things you
said a second ago was about this the
evol evolutionary basis of we're talking
about happiness and what it is to be
happy. You talked about the partner
part. What is the evolutionary basis of
meaning and purpose? Why do we need
that?
Right? So we've got a very big frontal
lobe. Right? So for remember earlier I
was talking about adaptation versus
adaptation. One argument for why we love
literature so much is that it our brains
need nourishment via storytelling and
therefore that's an exaptation. My brain
expects to be fed stuff that keeps me
engaged and therefore literature is one
way by which I eat that nourishment to
use the food analogy. Right? So I
suspect that because we are sentient
beings, right? We we we're not beings
that are only driven by instincts of
survival and reproduction, right? I
mean, all animals have to solve two
problems. Survive and reproduce, right?
That's it. That's the entire game of
life. But because we have consciousness,
because we have metaan knowledge,
because we are sentient, there needs to
be more to life than simply having sex
and reproducing. And therefore, the way
that you elevate that consciousness is
through purpose and meaning. So, I'm a
very happy I mean, I should mention
though that happiness about 50% of
individual differences and happiness
scores comes from our genes. But the
good news is is that it leaves 50% up
for grabs, right? So I may be born with
innately a more sunny disposition than
you. So I'm now winning at the race. But
if I don't
have make good choices, if I don't adopt
good mindsets, then even though you
started lower than me in an innate
sense, you might surpass me. And so it
really is an interaction of nature and
nurture uh purpose and meaning. So to
that I may be answering it in an oblique
way. I argue and remember I said
having a a good partner and having a
good job are the two ways that you can
maximize happiness. I argue that the
best way to achieve occupational
happiness is two metrics. One of which
is going to relate to purpose and
meaning.
Having temporal freedom
all other things equal is better than
not having temporal freedom. Let me
explain what I mean by that. a an
airplane pilot
once the door shuts the next 16 hours
from LA to Singapore it's set right I
mean literally temporarily in terms of
time physically I'm stuck right that to
me is unthinkable I float through life I
I work harder than most people but I do
it in my own way right now I'm going to
go to a cafe and work on a book
prospectus then I'm going to go train
for an hour then I'm going to go read
for 3 hours and that temporal I don't
have what I call scheduling esphixia
right that helps me
I do
you do try to resolve that if you can
number two which is going to speak to
purpose and meaning I argue that all
other things equal any job that allows
you to instantiate your creative impulse
is a direct path to purpose and
happening happiness uh purpose and
meaning what do I mean by that a standup
A comic is creating a routine that until
he came along we didn't have. A chef is
creating a dish out of nothing. An
architect is creating that bridge that
didn't exist before. An author remember
earlier we were talking I think I think
it was off air and you were saying how
long did it take you or what was the
process? I said you know there's
something magical about writing a book
right because there literally is a day
where you open the laptop you open a
word document. that word document which
eventually you're going to call the
parasitic mind save doesn't have a
single letter typed it's blank and then
through the magic of creation creative
impulse a year later I press the send
button a year later you're consuming
that book that has to be a direct path
to purpose and meaning now that doesn't
mean that the actuarial scientist your
brother doesn't have a worthy life but
surely literally a person who wakes up
who's an artist, who's an author,
by the nature of him creating says, "Oh,
I can't wait to get to the studio." I
doubt that. Maybe not your brother. I
doubt that most actuarial scientists go,
"I'm going to get into that actuarial
table today like there's no tomorrow.
I'm gonna spank that actuarial table."
Okay. Okay. So, putting a bunch of ideas
together from your work then to arrive
at a conclusion that I haven't heard you
say. I read in the consuming instinct
your your other book chapter 4 that
younger siblings like me
Yes.
youngest of four are more likely to be
creative.
Oh, you you you pulled that one out.
Okay. So, does that mean that if we're
more likely to be creative and
creativity is associated with happiness
in the in the way that you just
described that I am happier than all of
my siblings?
Do you want to guess what Dr. Sad's
sibling order is?
You're the youngest
by far. So, let me let me explain let me
step before I answer that and the way
you frame the question, let me explain
what the mechanism is. Okay.
I also just want to add one layer to
that as well. I was sat with at a dinner
the other day with my um with about 10
of our directors really their founders
of companies essentially and I I thought
it would be interesting to go around and
ask them because I've started to form a
bit of a picture about this and I went
around the table and asked every single
one of them where do you rank in order
of siblings and eight of them ranked as
the youngest sibling.
Oh, I love it.
That was so crazy. Yeah.
Is that
Yeah,
that's psychology. So, let me tell you
the background to that theory. Okay.
Which I've done my own research on and
published work on it. But the original
theory comes from Frank Sulloway who's a
historian of science
who wrote a book which I highly
recommend to all your viewers. Uh it's a
it's a bit technical but you can get
through it. It's called Born to Rebel.
It's a book that explores historically
the the the the people who've generated
the biggest breakthrough
radical scientific innovations and what
was their birth order. And it turns out
not unlike how you did it with the 10
and eight of them were last born. Out of
the 28 most radical scientific
innovations ever posited,
23 out of the 28 were the the last born
later. Now, so then the question is,
okay, well fine, that that's just a
phenomenon, but what explains it? Now,
the explanation is mind-blowing. You
ready? So Frank Sulloway argued that
typically when we study the
psychological effects of birth order,
it's from the perspective of the parents
behavior to the child as a function of
their birth order. First child, I'm very
strict. Second child, I'm getting tired.
Fifth child, run the streets. I don't
give a [__] Okay, so that's the causal
causality of the birth order effect. He
flipped the whole thing. He said, "No,
no, no. much of the impetus of the birth
order effect is coming from the child.
And let me explain how he said that one
of the fundamental survival problems,
it's an evolutionary theory. One of the
fundamental uh survival problems that a
child faces is to differentiate itself
from all other siblings to to etch
maximal investment from the parents. How
do I do that? So that's called the
Darwinian niche partitioning hypothesis.
When you start off your firstborn, all
of the niches are unoccupied. There is
the I'm a good boy niche. I'm a rebel
niche. I'm a right there. There are many
many there's a panel of niches that are
unoccupied. So I'm firstborn. I'm going
to pick whichever one. The second born
is born.
There is n minus one niches. one is
taken. So the I'm a good boy niche. I
got to differentiate myself. I'm second.
I'm an [__] niche. I'm a I'm a
contrarian niche. Let's keep going down
the birth order. There are fewer and
fewer unoccupied niches left for later
borns, especially if the siph
argued that that forces the last born to
score differently on key personality
traits. one of which is open to
experience. So he argued that later
borns up to last borns by virtue of
having to solve that original problem
will end up being much bigger out of the
box thinkers not being stuck on
conformity on orthodoxy. Hence in the
context of scientific innovations the
lastborns are the ones who say no this
is [__] I'm going this way. Okay.
And so I tested that theory in a
consumer psychology setting where I
demonstrated that lastborns were much
more likely to be product innovators and
early product adopters. So I I took the
exact framework but instead of applying
it to radical scientific innovations, I
applied it to radical product
innovations and adoptions. Mhm.
So, so all that to say that based on
that one could surmise that if openness
to experience is correlated to
happiness, then the latterborns would
score happier. I I really wonder which
one it is cuz I can attest to kind of
both being true. I probably was a little
bit rebellious to get attention, but
also by the time I was 10, the same
rules didn't apply to me. When you said,
"How many are you?"
There's four.
Okay. When you said run the streets,
that's the perfect explanation of my
childhood. My my oldest the oldest,
which is my sister Amanda, she if she
wasn't home by 9:00 p.m., she was also a
woman, so the rules were slightly
different for her. 9:00 p.m. it was it
was hell to pay. If I didn't come home
for 2 to 3 days, there was no one there
to ground me anyway. And I think that
opens you up to experimentation. You
start fiddling with stuff. You start I I
was doing all kinds of things in the
house, like breaking things apart,
looking inside them. started little
businesses selling the cigarettes from
my mom's room. Sorry, mother. She really
doesn't know that I ever did that, but
all these kinds of things which started
to build this, you know, repository of
information, but also it built my
confidence.
Yeah.
In a way, which allowed me to be
entrepreneurial and develop this
different relationship with risk. So,
it's hard to figure out which one it is.
Maybe it's both.
It's probably both. I think it's a bit
of both. Uh but yeah, I you know, I
haven't been I I know that your team had
asked me what are some questions that we
could ask that no one else. Well,
certainly pulling up that birth order
one, you've succeeded on asking me a
question that I certainly haven't been
asked in a long time. So, kudos to you.
Well, yeah, it's a incredible. We have a
lot of great researchers. So,
and by the way, both my wife and I are
lastorns. So, to to the assortative
mating, and I'm not sure if that's been
done, and if it hasn't been done, it' be
very easy to do,
right? So, here's an experiment. If
anybody steals it, I better get the
credit. You just look at a thousand
marriages, calculate their satisfaction
score, their happiness score, and then
see if there is a sort of mating on
birth or ownership.
Interesting.
Boom. There's there's your thesis for
your undergraduate psychology degree,
which you will pursue and send me an
email that I deserve the credit for
having forced. Why don't I just run this
as a advert on social media as a survey
and and so I can get a link run it as a
Facebook meta ad at people and say um
are you married? If they say they are
I'll say how long have you been married
they'll say how long I said are you and
your partner where do you rank in terms
of birth order and then I can get the
stats.
Absolutely. So many studies now
scientific studies are conducted online
and they can be conducted online in
exactly the way that you said you use
existing social portals to have a big
wave of data collection. But there are
other ways by the way you could have you
have you heard of mTurk?
No.
So mturk is a platform where people sign
up to be participants. Right. Now, let's
say I'm a researcher and I say, I want
men over 18 years old. Okay.
Mhm.
Well, that's easier to get than if I
were to say, I want men who are over 18
years old, shorter than 6 feet, and from
Lithuania, and they're diabetic. Now
depending on how I structure my criteria
of inclusion,
the price that I have to pay for getting
those participants will go up.
Yeah.
Right. So if I'm running a study, I just
need male and female adults to run a
study on this task. It ends up being a
few cents. And so it has opened up the
velocity at which we can do research,
scientific research, not just stuff I
post on Twitter. scientific research it
has increased it 10fold. So, so you can
certainly do that.
We'll do it. So, we will I set this as a
challenge for my research team and our
data science team which is to run a
survey on social media using adverts.
So, digital adverts, Facebook ads, meta
ads, X ads, whatever. And the survey
should basically seek to answer first
their gender, their marital status, ask
what birth order they fell in, and then
ask what order their birth their marital
partner fell into. But then also
understand how long they've been
together because we want to check these
marriages are legit.
Absolutely.
And I'll put it on the screen.
That'd be so cool. And please share with
the result. Well, by the way, what we're
doing right now is what I call So in the
in the happiness uh book, I have a
chapter called life as a playground. And
I argue that science is the highest form
of play because what when you're doing a
1,00 piece puzzle, you're putting which
puzzle, which piece goes with what.
Well, what's science? There's a bunch of
variables floating around. Does this one
correlate with this one? Does this one
cause this one or the other way? I'm
just playing now and I'm getting paid
for it. How could I not be happy?
Mhm. But the puzzle of life,
unfortunately, it's the puzzle is
three-dimensional, which means sometimes
you think you got it in the right place,
but actually it was just 100 years
later, you find out that it was
completely
wokeness.
Yes, sir.
It's it's really intriguing to me that
the evolutionary scientists that I've
spoken to have for some reason all found
themselves on the subject of wokeness in
society and it and it's hard for the
average person to maybe understand the
link between evolutionary science and
wokeness and politics.
Right. So you want me try to tease those
out?
Yeah. And what well how did you find
yourself talking about the idea of
wokeness?
Right. So it it all began as we
mentioned earlier in our chat when I saw
the rejection of biology in explaining
human affairs which is something that I
called biophobia. The fear of using
biology to explain human affairs and at
the time it was in the service of the
scientific work that I was doing. I mean
what do you mean you're desk rejecting
my paper at a journal because you don't
think that biology is relevant to
consumer behavior? How could it be
otherwise?
That's insane. So that's when I was
first exposed to the possibility of a
human a human mind being parasitized
right. Uh now let me explain why I use
the parasitic framework how I came up
with that. So one of the things that you
do as an evolutionary scientist when
you're trying to understand the
evolutionary signature of a behavior you
often will compare it across species.
Remember earlier I talked about testes
size and uh AC and across primates and
female right? So it was many different
species and that allows you to then draw
a final principle based on comparing all
those species. So I started looking
through the animal literature to look
for something that might explain why do
animals do insane things. And so that's
when I fell on the field of
parasettology, which is just the study
of parasites. But I wasn't looking for
because a tapeworm is a parasite, but it
goes into your intestinal tract. I
wanted the parasites that go into your
brain, those are called neuroparasites.
And it turns out that there's a very I
mean, it's almost like science fiction.
There's a whole field of study that's
that explores this host parasite dynamic
where the parasite is trying to enter
the host's brain alter its circuitry to
suit its interests.
What is a parasite?
So a parasite is usually I mean
literally a brain worm. So for example,
toxopplasma Gandhi is a parasite that
can infect human minds, but it most
famously infects the minds of mice. When
they are parasetized in their brains by
this parasite, they become sexually
attracted to cats and their sex and
their urine, which is not a good.
Yeah. So let let me give you a few
examples. There's a wood cricket, an
actual cricket that abhores water. Okay.
it it doesn't like it stays clear of
water when it is paracetized by a
hairmworm
needs to get the wood cricket to jump in
water because it could only complete its
reproductive cycle in water. So a wood
cricket that doesn't have the brain worm
looks at the water and says I'm staying
away. A wood cricket that is paracetized
by this hairworm jumps into the water
merely to its death because it has
altered its neurosircuitry to suit its
interest. Okay. So when I saw that field
neuroparictology
I had my Euroka Eureka moment just like
I did when I first discovered
evolutionary psychology. I said, I will
now use the neuroparacettological model
to argue that human beings can not only
be paracetized by actual physical
brainworms, they could be parasetized by
ideological brainworms. And so
continuing the metaphor, I said, so what
are these parasites? Postmodernism is a
parasitic idea. So, so postmodernism
actually I argue that that is the
granddaddy of all parasitic ideas
because postmodernism
purports that there are no objective
truths other than the one objective
truth that there are no objective
truths. So,
and the reason for that is everything is
shackled by biases. Everything is
shackled by subjectivity. So, to speak
of an objective truth with a capital T
is nonsense. Everything is subjective.
And therefore, I argue in the book that
all of these parasitic ideas originally
started with a noble goal. And in the
service of that goal, if there has to be
a collateral damage called truth, so be
it. It's a worthwhile collateral damage
in the service of that higher social
justice goal. No, it's a deontological
principle. It's an absolute. Right? So
you never pursue science in a biased
manner. Freedom of speech is available
to all. It's not I believe in freedom of
speech but not for Donald Trump. Then
you're being a consequentialist.
So that's what the book is about. It
traces the history of all these
parasitic ideas and then it offers a
mind vaccine against that stupidity.
What if the freedom of speech causes
harm?
Yes. to people and risks their lives.
That's a great question. So, I am a free
speech absolutist. And so, let me
explain what that means. We didn't get
into my personal history. I'll just give
it for the relevance of what I'm about
to say. I was born in Lebanon. I grew up
in Lebanon and we escaped Lebanon under
imminent death because of being Jewish.
Okay? So
my Jewish identity caused me to come
close to being eradicated.
Give me some color and detail to that
story.
So I was born in Lebanon in the 60s. Uh
Lebanon was historically referred to as
the Paris of the Middle East.
Progressive tolerant Lebanon.
Progressive tolerant in the context of
the Middle East, which means something
very different than progressive and
tolerant in the West. And you'll see in
a second why. When I was 5 years old,
uh, Gamal Abd Naser, who was the
president of Egypt, who was a very
popular figure in the Arab world because
he was what's called a panarabist,
meaning he was trying to unify the Arab
people under one umbrella, right? To
hopefully defeat the pesky Jews and so
on. He passed away. when he passed away
when I was five years old, as so often
happens in the Middle East, people take
to the streets to scream and shout and
burn and lament and so on. And as they
were proceeding down my street where I
lived as a 5-year-old child, the the
screaming was death to Jews, death to
Jews. So I turned to my mother and say,
"Why why are they screaming death? What
do we have to do with this?" Hi, don't
don't put your head out. Okay, so that
was my first time where I saw, wait a
minute, there there are people out there
that want me dead because I'm Jewish.
Fast forward a few years later, we're in
class and the teacher, this is pre-Ivil
War, okay? The Civil War started in 75.
Uh, sitting in class, teacher says,
every to everybody, please stand up and
say what you want to be when you grow
up. I want to be a policeman. I want to
be a doctor. I want to be a soccer
player. One kid gets up who I had known
through all the years of elementary
school who knew I was Jewish said, "When
I grow up, I want to be a Jew killer to
rockus applause and laughter and so on."
Then the Lebanese war broke out. It
became impossible to be Jewish in
Lebanon. We left Lebanon under very,
very difficult conditions. Once we
immigrated to Montreal, Canada, my
parents,
maybe they regret it now, kept returning
to Lebanon because we still had business
interest in full-fledged brutal massive
war. On one of their return trips in
1980, they were kidnapped by Fatah,
which is one of the Palestinian
factions. Some really bad things
happened to them. But then luckily
through the connections that we had we
were able to get them out.
Some bad things happened to them
inside captivity.
I mean you can imagine
they were tortured.
Yeah. Uh my mother said and I' I've
seldom said this. I'm only saying it
because you you're asking. My biggest
fear when I found out the story after
the fact. I didn't even know they were I
didn't know that they they they were
kidnapped as it happened. I knew there
was a lot of mayhem in the house and I
was asking what's going on. They said,
"Oh, mom and dad have some business
issues." They were lying to me to
protect me. I'm I'm 15 years old. Okay.
Although there was a kid at school in my
high school who whose parents were very
good friends of my parents, also
Lebanese Jews. He knew that my parents
were kidnapped. I didn't know they were
kidnapped. And later I found out that as
he saw me in high school walking around
and laughing and joking, he thought,
"Boy, this guy is made of ice. I mean,
he's he's callous that he's taking it so
relaxed." But actually, I didn't know
that this he knew, but I didn't know.
Okay. So when they came out of captivity
and came back to Montreal, my biggest
speak about evolutionary psychology and
the male mindset, my biggest fear was
whether my mother had been raped.
Now she told me stories of whatever, but
she said that she she says I never knew
if it was true and we only discussed it
that one time and we never discussed it
again. She said that no, she wasn't.
Now, I don't know if she
lied about that. She She said some other
really bad things. I mean, I'm not going
to get into all of it, but I've always
wondered whether she said that just so
that, you know, it's not exactly, you
know, it's shame and so on. But I
remember that if she had said yes, my
thinking as a 15year-old boy was that I
would spend the rest of my life seeking
vengeance on those [__] Okay? So,
it wasn't a pleasant upbringing. I could
tell you stories that you wouldn't
believe. It would be much worse than
Rambo. So now coming back to your uh
freedom of speech issue and if it causes
harm. I am Jewish with my personal
history. I support the right of
Holocaust deniers to spew the most
offensive thing possible which is they
are rejecting a documented historical
reality where 6 million people were
exterminated. Nothing could be more
offensive. No, it never happened. So you
want to talk about hurt and offense and
insult, that's it. But in a free
society, I have to tolerate racists,
imbeiles, [__] falsehood spreaders.
I beat them by speaking here by telling
better ideas. So the only context where
I don't support freedom of speech, it's
already enshrined in the first
amendment, direct incitement to
violence. Okay. So, let me draw a thing.
I go I'm I'm a let's suppose I were a
white supremacist or neo-Nazi. If I get
up on a show and say Judaism is a croc
of [__] it's useless. It's the most
disgusting religion. Totally okay.
Freedom of speech. If I say later
tonight at the corner of Lens, Lexington
and 6th Avenue there is a synagogue.
Let's go to when they come out of
service and beat the hell out of those
Jews, if not kill them. That's not okay.
Now, it has to be direct incitement of
violence. So, you can't say criticizing
Judaism or Islam can create
Islamophobia, [__] No ideology is
above scrutiny. No belief system is
above scrutiny. Your feelings are hurt,
f off. Grow a pair. Okay? So, as long as
you don't say, "Let's kill the Jews,
spend all the rest of your life
criticizing Judaism," that's your right.
Some people will say that it's kind of
like I was thinking of it like a
staircase. As you were speaking, I was
drawing a staircase because if I sat
here and I said I consider myself to be
a black man. I mean, I'm half black. I
guess my my mother's Niger and my
father's English. But if I was to sit
here and say all mixed ethnicity people
like myself are evil, they are
disgusting, they are vultures, they are
vermin, which is some of that sort of
1940s
narrative towards um the Jewish
population. It's not long before if if
me as a podcaster and many more of us
all got behind that narrative, you would
see this inevitable rise in people going
out there and killing people that are
mixed race.
Yes.
And this is this is where it becomes
tricky, right? So for me, Joe Rogan, Lex
Freedman, Andrew Huberman, all of the,
you know, podcasters who have who have a
significant audience, Alex Cooper, you
name them, all started hitting a
specific group of people with a
narrative. I'm convinced there'd be a
rise in violence towards those people
just walking down the street and living
their lives.
Right.
And this is where the issue arises.
Okay. So then let me let me let me test
your belief. Are you familiar with the
grooming gangs in Britain?
I'm familiar with the notion of it.
Yeah. I I know I think I know what
you're going to say. I think I've heard.
So up and down England, in every town
that you can think of, big or small, for
the past 30 plus years, there's been an
industrial scale level grooming and
raping of white British girls. The
perpetrators are 90% plus on the
conservative estimate, 90%. Coming from
one background and one ideology. Is it
marginalizing and insulting to identify
that ideology? I'd say it's not because
it's probably import an important data
point to understand the causation of a
of a thing. Okay, let me give you
another example.
Um, American prisons are predominantly
occupied by black men or at least it
overindexes with black men versus the
population ratios. So, are black men
therefore criminals
um at birth? Right. Well, that the way I
would address that is I would defeat
that statement with science. So, I would
say, can you show me the data that
suggests that dispositionally, meaning
innately? What would be the mechanism by
which uh black men are higher than white
men? Now, if you show it, great. But I'm
willing to bet you can't show it.
Therefore, what you just stated is a
bunch of [__] And you know how what
you're going to suffer are the social
consequences and stigma of being a
racist [__] But I I let you say it,
but I'll defeat your idea. On the other
hand, if you said uh if we look at
patterns of criminality in the United
States, are black men
exponentially
uh over represented? Yes. Now, we can
say it's because it's white supremacy
that causes black men to kill white
people. Or we could say, could there be
any positive agents that if we are
caring decent people, maybe we should
talk about openly? Well, in today's
world, I couldn't even I say I don't
give a [__] But most people would say,
don't even say that that there's a
greater incidence of black criminality.
That itself is racist and you're
marginalizing people. So that's why I
don't believe in the concept of
forbidden knowledge.
Forbidden knowledge is the idea that
there is some knowledge that should not
be pursued precisely because of your
scare staircase. It's going to result in
negative downstream effects. I argue
that that's a grotesqually dangerous
principle. Why? So here I'm going to
introduce the term and explain it which
I've mentioned earlier. In ethics there
are two ethical systems. There is what's
called deontological ethics and
consequentialist ethics. Deontological
ethics is absolute statements like
contient imperatives. It is never okay
to lie. That would be a deontological
statement. A consequentialist statement
would be it is okay to lie to spare
someone's feelings. So I always joke if
you want to have a long happy marriage
when you hear the following question. Do
I look fat in those jeans? put on your
consequentialist hat really fast and
say, "No, sweetie. You've never looked
more beautiful. I might have just lied,
but I just spared my partner, my wife's
feelings." So, for many, many things, it
makes perfect sense that we all wear our
consequentialist hat. But there are
certain principles that are foundational
that by the very definition of that
principle have to be deontological.
Okay. Freedom of speech is
deontological. The pursuit of truth has
to be deontological. Presumption of
innocence in the justice system has to
be deenthological. Right? Journalistic
integrity if you truly are a truth
reporter has to be deontological. But
what have we seen throughout the last
four or five years? Let me show you
violations of these. I believe in
freedom of speech but not for Donald
Trump. the antlogical principle has
become consequentialist.
I believe in journalistic integrity, but
not when it comes to Hunter Biden's
laptop because if we release that
information, then h then Joe Biden loses
to Orange Himmler and then that's too
bad. So, it's perfectly okay to suppress
what we now know is an absolutely true
laptop where there is astronomical
political corruption, but it was okay to
lie. I believe in presumption of
innocence, but not for Brett Kavanaaugh
because, you know, he's a gang rapist
going up and down the eastern seabboard
raping everybody. Now, of course, we
have no data to support that, no
evidence. And the one who accused him
one day before the confirmation said
that she thinks it was 36 years later.
It could have been 38. It could have
been last week. I can't really remember,
but I know that he sexually assault me
and we don't really care about this
thing called evidence. A lot of my super
fancy colleagues in friends said, "Oh, I
know that we should assume that someone
is presumptively innocent, but it's too
important in this case to apply that
deontological principle." They didn't
use that word. They don't even know it.
So in this case, let us just assume that
Brad Kavanaaugh was a serial rapist. So
no, there is no forbidden knowledge in
science. I I'll give you a great
example. There's a guy called, his name
escapes me right now. He was a
psychologist at University of Western
Ontario who spent his entire career
studying racial differences.
And here's now the worst part in
intelligence. Okay. So, I remember one
time this is I don't think I've ever
mentioned this story personaliz so
you're getting an exclusive here. 1996
I'm speaking at the international
congress of psychology.
I'm a young professor just out of my
PhD. I'm talking about something very
non controversial about what are the
types of strategies that people use when
they're making decisions under time
pressure. And I'm in a room. So, there
are four other speakers in that session.
Okay? and the room is filled with maybe
1500 people and there is like this real
electricity and I'm and I'm not a very
nervous public speaker thinking what's
going on here why is there such tension
well I found out I had I hadn't looked
at the program the guy who gets up to
speak before me is that infamous
psychologist who now starts putting up
graphs of the intelligence of white
women black women black men And I said,
"Oh my god, I'm dead. I'm going to be
lynched by proxy." Now, here's the good
news. When he finished his talk and I'm
next, about 1,425
out of the 1500 people rushed out of the
room to follow him and badger him. And I
was like, that was the only time in my
life where I said, "Thank God that
everybody's left." Usually, you want
more people in the audience. I was like,
"Oh, thank God." And then I have got
like, you know, 70 people there. I'm
right
now. in his case. I've asked close
colleagues of his uh and as I'm talking
I'm trying to remember his name. Philip
Rushton, that's his name. Philip
Rushton, they people could check him
out. I've asked some of his colleagues,
do was this guy was he a racist? Because
he's always said, look, I just collected
the data and I presented the data and I
offered possible explanations.
Now, even something as contentious as
potentially incendiary as that, I would
argue if you truly collected the data in
a completely unbiased manner, you should
not be not publishing it because it's
going to appear racist. Well, what do
you think? Do you think
I care if something's true or not? And I
think I have the,
you know, I have the what? I don't know.
I don't know what the word is.
Strength of character.
I don't want to I don't want to pretend
like I'm some like hero that's pursuing
truth at all costs because that's not
how I feel about myself. What I would
rather know is what's true
because then I can deal with the truth
and the truth doesn't offend me in any
way. If you told me now that 31-year-old
mixed race guys that have Nigerian
heritage and their father's from
Coventry are statistically dumber and
and it was robust, I would believe it
and I would be okay with it. 0% of me
would would suffer any offense. 0%. of a
strong personhood.
Maybe that's it. There's nothing that
I'm so happy with who I am in myself.
I'm so content with my own life and the
way that I found it that if you told me
that my brain size means that I'm weak
in X, Y, and Zed, which literally a
doctor told me cuz they scan my brain
and said, "Oh, you've got ADHD, which
means you're going to be bad at all
these things. Your handwriting is going
to be bad." I go, "Cool."
Yeah.
There's no offense taken. But I can also
imagine a world where a certain someone
with a certain disposition might just
take offense to a lot of things. So then
in that case we have we're at a
bifurcation at that point. We can either
say
to anyone who might be offended please
grow a pair because the world is
requires anti-fragility and there are
stressors in life that are going to hurt
you and you'll thank me later for me
teaching you to have to grow a pair. Or
we can take the other road which says
let's sanitize the world so that we
maximize that no one is ever hurt
because we're kind and compassionate
people. And if in that service of that
sanitization process we have to murder
truth so be it. And that's by the way
what leads to all those parasitic ideas
because as I said I'm I'm trying to be
charitable to the to the promulgators of
those [__] ideas. They it starts off
with a noble cause right? They're trying
to improve the world in their warped
sense. And because that's the highest
goal, they end up if I have to murder
truth, that's that's a collateral
damage. It's okay, right? I don't want
to I don't want a 6'4 guy who's got a
stronger jawline than me and a beard to
say, "Please address me as she and you
better do so." And it's a governmental
edict, right? That that's what Jordan
Peterson and I, we were both summit. I
mean separately by the Canadian
government to appear in front of the
Canadian Senate when we were offering
our warnings against it's now bill but
at the time it was a table bill called
Bill C16 which was trying to incorporate
gender identity and gender uh
orientation or whatever it's called into
the hate law rubric. And my position was
yes, of course, we should seek to have a
world where everybody lives dignified
lives free of bigotry. But should I be
teaching in my evolutionary psychology
courses that there is no such thing as
male female that we clearly know that so
then sexual selection that Darwin taught
us is no longer true. And they all
started scoffing and mocking in a
theater of the absurd. Well, pretty much
I hate to be the guy who says I told you
so, but lit. I mean literally every
single thing that I predicted came out
to be true because once you lose the
reflex to have a deontological defense
of a deontological principle then all
bets are off.
An objective sense
objective sense. No. Of course I fight
for the right of everybody to live lives
free of dignity. But you can't play
sports with a girl. I mean in what world
do we live in?
I played sports with a girl last night.
I don't want to hear about it. co-ed
football. We played soccer.
Ah, is that right? Okay. But you know
what I mean. You shouldn't run the 100
meters and call yourself I mean you know
the Leah Thomas case, the the swimmer
swimmer. Yeah.
I mean imagine the level of pathological
narcissism that you must experience
where you say the need for me to
reaffirm my identity even if he truly
held that identity is supersedes the
rights of all those women.
Yeah. Do you know what just to give my
position on on this? I if someone asked
me if someone had the jawline you
described and they asked me to refer to
them as a woman and they were wearing a
dress. I've got no problem with that.
Okay.
I'm going to refer to if you if that's
what you you want me to refer to you as
in the same way that if when I asked you
before the start of this conversation,
how do you want to be referred to? You
told me your name, your title, etc. I
will because again,
it's not hurting me,
right
to to refer to you as she, he, they,
whatever you want. And if that's going
to make you feel um better about
yourself then on a costbenefit analysis
in my head I go it's costing me nothing
to refer to you as that.
Yes.
If it then has implications which shift
that costbenefit analysis i.e there's
harm caused to another group of people
because of that or I'm I'm you know I
might be thrown in prison if I
accidentally make a mistake. That's
where I think I think that's a little
I think I completely agree with that.
Right. as long as you don't harm others
in that calculus in that dynamic and as
long as it's not compelled right so and
I've said it I said look if if I I I've
never had this in my classes but let's
suppose a student came to me privately
and said you know I'd like to do you
think I'm going to say no way [__]
I'm going to no I will I will go along
as you said but if it's the government
who says you better do it now we're
different if the government says you
better start putting he him in uh in
your electronics signature. No. Right.
I'll give you an example. I think in the
Canadian uh government has now issued
for passports a thing whereby because
you want to be inclusive and kind to
non-binary people, which basically makes
up one out of every 15,000 people. So,
it's not even the tyranny of the minor
of the minority. It's the ten tyranny of
the minority minority minority. I mean,
it's really it's a unicorn. Non-binary.
Non-binary is I'm neither male, neither
female. So, because historically, you
know, sexually reproducing species,
male, female phenotype, that to put male
and female marginalizes the non-binary.
Now, we lose that marker. No, no, no. I
want to be referred as a biological
male. My wife is a biological female. my
children also have. So all of our most
fundamental biological markers should be
erased lest it might offend the one in
50,000 nonb No. So that speaks to your
first point which is what about causing
harm to other people. So yes, I will
never go out of my way to be frivolously
mean to someone and my default value
will be to be kind to you. But your need
to
honor your identity doesn't mean that I
get to go on the celebratory train with
you. Do
you know who sometimes gets caught in
the crossfire on these issues? And it's
not just with the issue around gender,
it's around, you know, religion and race
and these kinds of things are the people
in that group, in that minority group
who agree.
Yeah. But because they identify as maybe
the the a sex that wasn't the sex they
were born as, they then get they get the
abuse. You talked about it being
difficult now being a a Jewish person in
Canada. Yeah.
It's it's really difficult, I think, in
this current moment to be a trans person
in this world because this macro debate
is raging,
right?
It's raging on if I go on Twitter, if I
go on YouTube, it's it's passionately
raging on both sides. And I want I got
friends that identify as they them um
and they aren't participating in this
raging war, but I I imagine I would
imagine that the probability of them
experiencing abuse now walking down the
street
has increased. And again, I guess this
is this is goes back to the sort of
consequential truth versus the objective
truth. But those are the people I feel
sorry for because
I know them. They're not in this like
screaming ex war, but their lives have
been made worse because of all of this
stuff.
That's sad.
And they're just minding their own
business, getting on with their lives,
loving whoever they love, identifying
however they want. And I feel that's
kind of I that's the group of people
that I feel most emp most empathy
towards in this current debate.
Yeah. No, I hear you. I hear you. By the
way, only because you mentioned the word
empathy. So my next book is titled
suicidal empathy. Because in the book
what I'm arguing to our earlier point
about to be properly modulated and
regulated I argue that the the emotion
of empathy has clear evolutionary
reasons right I mean there are adaptive
reasons why each of our emotions has
have has evolved the problem is when it
misfires.
Yeah.
When not only it misfires in that for
example it becomes hyperactive but when
it also misfires to the wrong target. So
if I'm empathetic to the transerson to
the detriment of all biological women,
that's a misfire, right?
Yes, it would be great for immigrants to
come in legally to experience the beauty
of the West. I am an immigrant. Elon
Musk is an immigrant.
I I guess I am. I was born in Botswana,
but
you're an immigrant, but you hopefully
came in legally. That doesn't mean
No comment.
Sorry.
No.
Uh but opening the door to 10 million 12
million because it's not fair for
Guatemalans and Al Salvador and not to
come in and share the experience. No,
that's not right. uh life you know who
Thomas Soil is the the famous economist
he's a
yeah you mentioned I think you mentioned
I mentioned before right Thomas soil uh
who's an economist said look I'm
paraphrasing his words and I agree with
it economics is this is the study of
tradeoffs of cost benefits right if we
had infinite resources then yes let's
give free health care to every human
who's ever lived and will ever live but
that's not the world we live in so if I
am a paying
uh taxpaying citizen who's paid into the
system for 40 years. Do I like the idea
that someone can come across the
southern border and have the exact same
rights as me? Does that seem like it's
the proper directing of empathy? Maybe
not. If if you're homeless, it's a very
bad thing. Does that mean that your
rights to be shooting up uh the drugs in
the public park where my children play
supersedes their rights? And so in the
next book, I'm going to be looking at a
bunch of policy decisions that in my
view are disastrous and argue that they
all stem from this reflex of suicidal
empathy.
If one immigrant crosses the the border
into America and they go to Texas and it
improves their quality of life, who does
that hurt?
Deontologically? Everybody.
Why? Because there are rules and laws,
right? Is it is do you teach your future
children, God willing, don't steal, or
do you live in San Francisco where it's
okay to steal if it's under 950? What
are you going to teach your kids?
Don't steal.
That's it. You answer your question.
What are they stealing?
They're stealing the money that should
go to people who've paid taxes for 40
years. They're stealing my right to
Okay, I I did my masters. I'm I'm going
to say this not because I'm
uh signaling my CV because it's relevant
to the story. I did my masters of
science and my PhD at Cornell. I was a
professor at Cornell, professor at
Dartmouth and a professor at UC Irvine.
I'm probably one of the best known
professors around. If I want to come as
a Canadian to the United States, do you
know what I have to do? I have to follow
the law. I can't come and say I'm going
to live here and I'm going to work here
and I'm going to take this job and I'm
right I mean I I literally get stopped
and taken to another room where they say
are you making money and many of the
border recognize me will take pictures
with me because it's a country of laws
and therefore I with whatever
attributes I might bring that are
positive to the United States has to go
through a formal process. But if I'm an
MS13 gang member with two tier tattoos
on two tears tattoos that says that I've
killed two people in El Salvador and I
walk in, do you think does is your
reflex and intuition, Stephen saying,
but it's not fair to let him in. We we
understand why very dangerous 59year-old
professor Gatsad should we should really
vet him and he should go through the
legal process before my biggest goal in
life is to live in Southern California.
I haven't been able to because legally I
can't I don't have a professorship here.
That's the thing that hurts me the most.
I don't live in the luminosity of the
sun. So that [__] who comes in
illegally is hurting me because I'm
freezing in Montreal.
He's not hiding. He is hurting me.
Why?
Because once the legal system breaks
down, then all bets are off. So what's
happened in San Francisco where all of
the retail shops have closed?
So crazy. I was talking to my friends
about this this morning.
Oh,
I sent a photo to my friends of a CVS
and said, "Why is toothpaste and chewing
gum locked in a glass cage in CVS in
America? America's going to be the
richest economy in the world. It's going
to be the, you know, the the apple of
everyone's eye." And I went to a CVS yes
yesterday and I asked for um some
deodorant and some mouthwash and then I
was like it's trapped behind a cage
mouthwash deodorant.
Do you see that you
you know what happened?
What?
I I so you press a button and someone
comes over to you to open the cage to
give you the like toothbrush
and they open the c and I said to the
guy why do you trap it all behind glass
cages? and he tapped me on the shoulder
and he pointed down an aisle and he
says, "Look." And as I looked down the
aisle, there was a man stealing and
putting putting stuff in his socks.
So, do you do you do you I hope you
understand that you just answered that
question, right? Because if I steal that
one toothpaste, am I really hurting you,
Stephen? You live in England. How How is
saying to that guy in San Francisco,
don't steal? No, it's deontological. You
are hurting me. You're hurting me
deontologically. You're hurting the
ability for society to have predictable
laws, predictable cause and effect
relationships. If you steal, you'll be
punished.
Does this rely on society being fair
though?
And your next point is going to be it's
not fair, therefore why should we have
laws?
Yeah. Well, just wondering because if if
people see that and they go, well, I
don't know the answer here, so I'm just
posting questions. I'm really intrigued
by this train of thought. So I
understand what you're saying. We do
need laws. And I accept that point
because if we didn't have laws, then all
systems kind of fall apart, things fail,
then people won't want to come here
anyway. The reason they want to come
here in part is because there's laws and
that's created a society. But does it is
is that theory of sort of moral theory
contingent on the fact that the society
is fair and then obviously people would
then argue that this society isn't fair
because they've got there's people with
their fingers on the scales.
No society is perfect. But as someone
who is buffeted from the sample of
societies outside of the west, no
society is better than we you have here.
Meaning that if you look at some of the
staunchest defenders of the western
tradition, it may or may not surprise
you, Stephen, to know that many of them
are immigrants, right? I often use the
example of Ayan Hersy Ali, right? The
Somali immigrant who's one of the
staunchest. She's she's Muslim herself.
She's one of the strongest critics of
Islam. Why? Because she has sampled the
buffet of that society. She didn't go to
Welssley College where it's rarified in
Boston and then she can pontificate
while she bought her kafia from Amazon.
Right? She's lived that. I don't have to
pontificate about things that I know
nothing about. I grew up in the Middle
East. So therefore people who've lived
those experiences can come to the west
and say hey guys in the west you think
that this society is the default value
of societies. No no no this is a bleep.
This is an anomaly. You should really
work hard to defend what you have. You
crack the code of the values that you
need to have foundationally for
everything to flourish. This is not
normal. This is anomalous. But once you
start having consequentialist intrusions
into those deontological systems, it
breaks down very quickly. As you saw in
San Francisco, as you saw in the rush of
millions of people to the border because
the most fundamental law of law, I mean
Newton talked about every reaction,
every action has a reaction. Let's put
it in other terms, cause and effect.
Once you break that law, you're breaking
the most fundamental laws of nature,
right? So, should a felon have a 68th
chance? So, you've now been arrested
again and then we go through your record
and we find that you've been arrested 67
previous times. How many times must you
be arrested for you to have lost your
opportunity for another chance? Right?
Because that 68th time, that suicidal
empathy, because I'm so progressive,
led to that woman being killed, was her
life worthwhile that we might have
wanted to be a bit harder on you. So
that's what I mean at. So yes, of
course, I support the right of people to
better their lives. And we're all coming
from a nation of immigrants legally,
man. And also the other point I guess is
that
people would rebuttal and say about
their the privilege. They'd say, "Steve,
you know, um you got tremendous
privilege because of the parents you had
and they brought you to the UK when you
were a baby from Africa." And
I'm stopping you.
And they'll say you got they'll say you
got genetic privilege. They'll say, you
know, you your dad had a good brain and
he's passed some of that to you and your
mom had a good brain. And they'll say to
you, they'll say, "Gad, you know, if you
weren't brought from the Middle East
when you were younger, you wouldn't have
had these opportunities. So, you need to
pay that forward to other people that
don't have opportunities and privilege
by welcome welcoming them in, being
highly empathetic towards them, even if
they're in the in Mexico.
Legally or illegally? Legally, I'm off.
I'm let's do it. I'm all in. illegally.
No, you don't get, you know, it's unfair
that all these incelss don't have access
to sexual partners while some of us have
access. Maybe we need to set up a
communist system where using an app they
get to share with our women. Let's have
communist mating, right? Well, why is it
that you're only getting access to your
partner? That's privilege. How about the
homeless guy who doesn't have any sex
for the past two years? Don't you think,
Stephen, that you owe him?
So, equality of opportunity versus
equality of outcome.
Yes, sir.
We're saying we don't believe in
equality of outcome. No, no one, I
think, with a brain believes in equality
of outcome.
Oh, no. There is one with somewhat of a
brain. Camela Harris say that
she doesn't have a brain. So, you're
right. But she pretends that she has a
brain and she is Lenin. She is
communism. It be it it completely
paralyzes me in befuddlement
to be able to play a clip of this woman
where she's saying I'm a mixture of
Stalin and Lenon and Marx and Marx in
everything that I believe in and the
United says United States which is
technically a capitalist country says
sign me up I think you'd be a good
president. So if we define equality of
outcome is everybody deserves this the
same chance to get the same outcome. Is
that kind of how it's defined or
Well, it's it's it's equality of outcome
says to the extent that we don't have
equality of outcome, it must be because
of nefarious reasons. So, so for
example, and I've actually satized this,
you know, one of the things I do is
satire and I draw analogies to show how
stupid things are. I said, you know,
there are 200 countries in the world. Do
you know how many have won the World
Cup?
I don't know.
Any number. 200 countries. World Cup's
been going on since 1930.
I'm going to say 12.
Eight.
Okay.
That is so unfair. How come those
Japanese have never been given a chance?
What about the Jews? Israel never
winning once. Why is FIFA so
anti-Semitic? Never once in Islamic
country. That sucks. It's those [__]
Brits who've won. Brazil, Argentina,
Germany, Spain, France, Italy, Uruguay.
That sucks. Laos never.
What happened? Malaysia never.
Botswana. We've never won one.
You've never won. That's racism.
I looked at the uh results of uh the
Boston Marathon over the past 35 years.
Do you want me to summarize it for you?
I'm going to do it.
Kenya, Kenya, Kenya, Kenya, Kenya,
Kenya, Kenya.
Ethiopia, Kenya, Kenya, Kenya, Kenya,
Kenya, Kenya, Ithrea, Kenya, Kenya,
Kenya. What a bunch of [__] The
Boston Marathon. Only black guys from
Kenya get to win. What about short
Jewish guys? Never. We don't get a
deserve to deserve a chance. It's so
ludicrous that even morons like Kamala
Harris will say, "No, no, but that's
different." No, no, it's not different.
It's a deontological principle. Human
beings are a hierarchical species. Some
are taller, some are shorter. Some are
harder working, less harder working.
Smarter, less smart. Funnier, less
funnier. Communism works well for some
species. EO Wilson, who was a Harvard
biologist, recently passed away. One of
my big professional regrets is that we
were never able to have a conversation
on my show. He's one of my big
intellectual heroes. His expertise,
Stephen, was in the study of social
ants. He was an entomologist. Now, why
is that relevant to the story? Because
social ants are communists because there
is a reproductive queen and everybody
else is indistinguishable. They're
worker ants or warrior ants. They're
just a blob. Right? So when he was
asked, I'm slightly paraphrasing, when
he was asked, "Professor Wilson, what
are your views on communism socialism?"
His rebuttal is one of my favorite
rebuttals in the history of humanity. So
the answer to communism socialism, great
idea, wrong species, right? Humans come
with their own innate human nature. Our
innate human nature is not communistic.
That's why communism has been tried in
many countries for the past 100 years.
And what has been the result in every
single place it's been tried? A
grotesque abject failure. The reason for
that is because when you take a
socioeconomic political system that is
contrary to human nature, you don't need
Gatsad to predict for you that it will
fail. That's like arguing. I would like
to create a new science law. It's called
non-gravity.
So, I'm going to throw a bunch of people
off big planes, but because I'm a fervor
believer in non-gravity, I don't think
that they will drop. But then I'm
astonished when out of a 100 people, all
of their brains squash on the floor.
That's because they're we're constrained
by this reality called gravity. By the
same token, Kamala Harris is the
anti-gravity person. So, I'm Canadian,
so I don't have a direct dog in this
fight. The reason why I speak out
against it because again, my social
commentary supersedes transcends whether
I'm American or Canadian. I'm talking
about bigger issues. Is communism the
ideal model for maximal flourishing?
Nothing could be clearer, but we've got
all these degenerates trying to
implement it here.
Would you vote for Trump if you could
if I were American? Yeah,
in a heartbeat
over Camela Harris
because that's
so right now we let's assume that it
does end up being Camela Harris versus
Donald Trump. I would vote 10 times for
Donald Trump.
What's wrong with Donald Trump?
He he's his worst enemy in that
cosmetically speaking I think he's
gotten better maybe by because of age,
maybe by discipline. uh he's gotten into
a lot of snafuss where he triggered the
eyeire of many people simply because of
how he delivered messages where had he
been a bit more polished he would have
avoided those things. So for example I
think that the fact that he never
returned on X has actually been a
blessing for him because he's the guy
who at 2:00 in the morning the president
of the United States at the time is
battling with some idiot because he
can't have the discipline to stop
himself. So I think
what about his character though?
Cuz if you if your kid grew up with the
character of Donald Trump, would you be
proud?
Probably more pride than Joe Biden.
But this is what happens on the other
side.
So you don't want me to ever compare to
someone else?
Well, this is what happens on the the
reason I'm asking these questions is
because if I ask someone on the like far
left, the first response they say they
their measurement of goodness seems to
be a comparison of the other side.
Right?
So
uh
if your son grew up with a character,
okay, so here are the some positive
traits and some negative traits of him.
Okay. I I don't uh pretend to know him.
Uh he is an entrepreneur.
I don't think there is a human being
who's been a better exemplar of what a
honeybadger is. Now, let me explain what
I mean by that because you may or may
not know that now. So, in in the last
chapter of the parasitic mind where I
have a a set of call to action, okay,
calls to action. One of them is I say
activate your inner honey badger. Why?
The honeybger has been determined
officially as the fiercest the most
ferocious animal in the animal kingdom.
That's saying a lot. There's a lot of
fierce animals. It's the size of a small
to mediumsized dog, right? And yet it
can go into a hornest net, get attacked
by a million bees, and get the honey. It
can withstand an attack of six adult
lions, and they back away. It's the size
of a small dog. Why? because it is so
ferocious. It's my brother going to that
beautiful girl not caring that he's 4
foot two, right? He's the man. He's the
top guy, right? So, when I say to
people, activate your inner honey
badger, I say be resilient, be tough,
not not be violent, be ideologically
fierce in defending first principles.
Well, who has had more things thrown at
this guy than Donald Trump? and he's got
more vigor and and
stamina than you and I combined. Well,
let's take a very concrete example. Who
has been shot in the head and then stood
up and went fight fight? Those are very
those are qualities that I am going to
teach my son. Now, is he polished? Is he
eloquent? Does he speak with proper
elocution? Does he have a big
vocabulary? No. No. No, no, but I'll
take a ferocious honey badger any day
over.
Those aren't character traits though,
eloquence and stuff like that. When I'm
talking about character traits, I mean
if someone said if someone seemingly
attempts to steal an election. You know,
Mike Pence did a speech the other day
where he basically said Donald Trump
asked me to at that moment when Mike
Pence could have I think prevented the
electoral decision. He said Michael Mike
Pence who was his his vice president,
Donald Trump asked me to go against the
constitution and I couldn't do it.
Right. So
that's a character thing. Uh so
and maybe it's linked to the focity of
the honey badger because someone that's
that ferocious when they in faith can't
accept defeat.
They can accept defeat.
As an academic, I like to be I know what
I know and I know what I don't know. So
here I would be speculative in saying
that that behavioral trait is a
manifestation of a that that behavior is
a manifestation of a character trait. I
don't know if that link is right or not.
I could easily argue and I'd be
speculating so I don't know for sure
that he was convinced that that election
was absolutely unequivocally stolen. So
when he's doing those things, it's not
he's saying I wish to be dictator for
life. I mean he did leave office, right?
But he's saying find me the mechanism to
ensure that those [__] don't steal
it from me. So I'm I'm neither here or
there on this one. No, he's not a
dictator. No, he didn't incite a violent
insurrection. He did. So, these are
things we can debate, but in term I I'll
put it another way.
Do you think that the world the world is
made up of some very very nasty bullies?
Do do we agree on that? Very very nasty.
Yes.
There's all the Islamic guys. There's
North Korea. There's China. There's
Putin.
Who do you think when they sit at night
they fear more? Do they do you think
that they feel the cackler, Camela
Harris, avocado brain, Joe Biden, or do
you think crazy cowboy?
Here's the here's the uh nuclear button.
You ready?
Eeny meeny miny mo catch a tiger by the
toe. Do you see what I'm doing? That
unpred unpredictability,
that's very powerful. When you go into a
prison uh yard for the first time,
everybody's looking at you. Is this guy
going to become a punk and my girlfriend
or is this guy that I should fear? How
you act that first hour or two is going
to determine how you do your time? Well,
Donald Trump is the guy that I want to
be running my prison yard, not the
cackler.
I hope you understand what I'm doing
here. I'm trying to in there's two
things I'm doing. The first thing is I'm
trying to form my own opinion by
interrogating. Am I successful at all in
No, no, it's really interesting. No, it
is really interesting and it's not just
you I'm asking these questions through
because I ask a bunch of people that are
smart and have different perspectives
and helps me form my own, but also I
feel I feel an obligation to represent
the other side. I understand how you
feel about Kla Harris. So, I'm trying to
interrogate this this feeling of Donald
Trump. Is there any character trait that
you can point out in Donald Trump that
is overtly
I'm almost certain that he had remember
you said you've got three groups of
friends and one group pathologically
cheats on their partners. I'm willing to
bet that Donald Trump is the head of
that thing. So, as a moral person who
wishes to be loyal and honor my wife, I
don't appreciate that trait because many
high status men have access to a lot of
beautiful women. And then what
determines your virtue and your
character is to be able to have the
self-control to not succumb to that. I
value that. I don't think Donald Trump
has it. Happy. I said something negative
about
No, no, no. Do you know it's funny
because when I when I when I heard your
opinion on um Donald Trump and Camala
Harris, I was in my hotel room thinking
one of the things I observe in people
that are political have a political
opinion
is they are like incapable of saying
anything critical about their own their
own candidate or the person that they'd
vote for. And it baffles me because it's
the same parasitic mind virus where
you've lost objectivity that that you
talk about in your work. So
no 100%. So, and I I wouldn't
necessarily only stop there, right? I
mean, we we could stop there, but but he
doesn't strike me as a man that is of
the highest moral virtues, right? So, I
am very much driven by an exacting code
of personal conduct. I'm willing to bet
that he doesn't come close to that. So,
so, so, but again, you live in the real
world, right? So, in the real world, you
don't have a perfect messianic
character. That's Jesus, right? So given
those two choices, which one do I want?
Well, I want the guy who's a bit
scarier. And Donald Trump is a lot
scarier than the Cackler.
I understand. And I I see flaws and I
see
at least one upside or more in both
options. So, but anyway, um what's the
most important thing we should have
talked about that we didn't discuss?
maybe the importance of social
connections uh which is one of the
fundamental ways that you could lead a
super happy life to to the point of the
happiness book. It turns out that the
quality of your social relationships is
a better predictor of your health in the
long term than your cholesterol scores
at page 50.
That's crazy. So having these meaningful
dialogues, whether it be in a formal
setting like on a on a show or whether
it be going to the pub and interacting
with people about whether Manchester
City or Manchester United is better.
We're a social species. Having
meaningful connections with people is
crucially important. Get out there,
read, get educated, build meaningful
connections with people, and hopefully
you'll be happy.
I have a closing tradition on this
podcast, Dr. Dad, where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest
without knowing who they're going to be
leaving it for. And the question that's
been left for you is tell me about a
time in which someone said something to
you, positive or negative, which really
capital letters struck stuck with you
and does still to this day.
Oh, what an amazing question. Uh, am I
allowed to know who that guest was or
you don't?
Unfortunately, no. No. Okay, perfect.
Well, what a what a cool uh thing to do.
And as you were saying it, I was already
answering it in my head. So remember
earlier we talked about purity and the
exacting standard of uh exacting code of
personal conduct.
About maybe 30 years ago, uh my mother
said, you know, God, you better learn
that the world doesn't abide to your
purity bubble. And the quicker that you
learn that, the happier you will be. And
I think it's the by far the most
profound thing that I've ever heard
anybody say because oftentimes what that
ends up causing is because of my code of
personal conduct this kind of
maladaptive perfectionism this moral
scrupulosity this purity bubble the
world should be you should never be
dishonest you should never be duplicitus
if I treat you well you should so it's
this like I live in this laal la land of
purity at least my expectations what
ends up happening
you you're setting yourself up for
disappointment because you are expecting
the world to abide to this beautiful
purity bubble but the world is ugly and
messy and so you end up with things
where someone comes up to you and says
for 25 minutes you know taking your time
with your children then when they leave
I'm pissed off to my wife for the next
10 minutes because I was imposing my
expectation which is I would never dare
do that to someone else. So, I think if
I were able to lower my expectations
and and internalize that message, I
wouldn't be as disappointed in so many
people so often.
Easier said than done.
Easier said than done. Yes.
It needs to be like a morning practice.
True.
Thank you so much for the work that you
do. Um, Dr. God, I found your books to
be really, really important because they
are unapologetically challenging and for
anybody who cares about the pursuit of
truth, whether they agree with you or
not, but just the pursuit itself of
truth, they care about ideas that are
unapologetic and are courageous and are
immune from political correctness. And I
know that some people who I doubt any of
them got to the end of the conversation,
but um some people who do care about
such a thing, I think those people are
the most important of our time and they
can find I think so many of the answers
that they're searching for in the books
that you write. I love the book about
happiness, happiness, eight secrets for
leading the good life. And I I
referenced your earlier book as well,
but the parasitic mind book I think is
the most important of them all because
it's so unbelievably relevant. And if
you understand what's written in this
book, I think you have a different lens,
a different pair of sunglasses that you
can walk through the world with and it
can make sense of the things that you're
seeing. In fact, both of the books have
this sort of throughine because if you
understand the world, as you said just
then, you can be happier within it
despite its imperfections. And so, thank
you for doing the work that you do. I
know it comes at a tremendous cost, a
personal cost. I don't know whether you
see it as a cost, but it's just an
inevitability. Um, but it's incredibly
important and I'm a big big fan of the
work that you do. Not not to say that I
agree with everything you've ever said.
Um, but I I care the most about hearing
it nonetheless and it feeding into my
sort of big intellectual reservoir of
information. So, I'm really really
appreciative of you and I hope you
continue to do the important work you're
doing. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Can I end with a
compliment?
Of course you can. I've been on a
million shows and I unhesitantly say
that this was one of the best
conversations. So, thank you for that.
Oh, that's a really remarkable honor.
Thank you so much. I appreciate you.
Cheers.
[Music]
Isn't this cool? Every single
conversation I have here on the Diary of
a CEO, at the very end of it, you'll
know I ask the guest to leave a question
in the diary of a CEO. And what we've
done is we've turned every single
question written in the diary of a CEO
into these conversation cards that you
can play at home. So you've got every
guest we've ever had their question. And
on the back of it, if you scan that QR
code, you get to watch the person who
answered that question. We're finally
revealing all of the questions and the
people that answered the question. The
brand new version two updated
conversation cards are out right now at
thecon conversationcards.com.
They've sold out twice instantaneously.
So if you are interested in getting hold
of some limited edition conversation
cards, I really really recommend acting
quickly.
[Music]